~Period 1: 1491-1607

~~Chapter 1: A New World of Many Cultures, 1491-1607

Encomienda system: This system involved the king of Spain giving grants of land and natives to individual Spaniards. These Indians had to farm or work in the mines. The fruits of their labors went to their Spanish masters, who in turn had to "care" for them.
Asiento system: This system let the Spanish bring in enslaved people from West Africa and required the Spanish to pay a tax to their king on each slave they imported to the Americas.

Bering Strait: This was a land bridge that once connected Siberia and Alaska and allowed people to migrate into North America.
Adena-Hopewell: This group of Indians, centered in what is now Ohio, is famous for the large earthen mounds it created, some large as 300 feet long.
Hokokam, Anasazi, and Pueblos: These were groups of evolved, multifaceted societies supported by farming with irrigation system in the dry region that now includes New Mexico and Arizona.
Lakota Sioux: This tribe acquired horses by trading or stealing them from Spanish settlers, allowing them to move away from farming to hunting and easily following the buffalo across the plains.
Iroquois Confederacy: This was a political union of five independent tribes who lived in the Mohawk Valley of New York. The five tribes were the Seneca, Cayuga, Onondaga, Oneida, and Mohawk.

Mayas (300-800 A.D.): This ancient civilization built remarkable cities in the rainforests of the Yucatan Peninsula (present-day Guatemala, Belize, and southern Mexico).
Aztecs: Several centuries after the decline of the Mayas, this civilization developed a powerful empire in central Mexico.
Tenochtitlan: Aztec capital that had a population of about 200,000, equivalent in population to the largest cities of Europe.
Incas: This civilization developed a vast empire in South America and was based in Peru.
Conquistadors: These were Spanish explorers and conquerors.
Hernan Cortes: This person conquered the Aztecs in Mexico
Francisco Pizarro: This person conquered the Incas in Peru, and secured Spain's initial supremacy in the Americas

Compass: This was an invention by the Chinese that helped European sailors navigate the seas.
Printing press (1450s): This was an early invention that aided the spread of knowledge across Europe.
Ferdinand and Isabella: These were the two people who funded Christopher Columbus on his trip to North America. One was the queen of Castile, and the other was the king of Aragon, and they married in 1469.
Protestant reformation (1500s): This was when certain Christians in Germany, England, France, Holland, and other northern European countries revolted against the authority of the pope in Rome. This led to a series of religious wars.
Prince Henry the Navigator: This person succeeded in opening up a long sea route around South Africa's Cape of Good Hope.
Vasco da Gama: This person was the first European to reach India through the Cape of Good Hope.
Ferdinand Magellan: This person died before he could complete his trip of circumnavigating the world.
Christopher Columbus: After searching for eight years for financial support, this person sailed west from Portugal and mistakenly believed that he had found a shorter route to Asia.
Line of Demarcation (1493): This is when the Pope drew a vertical, north-south line on a world map, and granted all lands to the west of the line to Spain, and all lands to the east to Portugal.
Treaty of Tordesillas (1494): This treaty was signed by Spain and Portugal, which moved the pope's line a few degrees to the west. This effectively gave Portugal the country of Brazil..

Portuguese slave trade (1400s): By this time, this country began trading for slaves from West Africa. They used the slaves to work newly established sugar plantations on the Madeira and Azores islands off the African coast. Producing sugar with this slave labor was so profitable that when Europeans later established colonies in the Americas, they used the slave system here.

John Cabot (1497): This person was an Italian sea captain who sailed under contract to England's King Henry VII. He explored the coast of Newfoundland.
Jacques Cartier (1534-1542): This person explored the St. Lawrence River extensively.
Roanoke Island (1587): Sir Walter Raleigh attempted to establish a settlement at this island off the North Carolina coast, but his venture failed.
Samuel de Champlain (1608): This person established the first permanent French settlement in America at Quebec, a fortified village on the St. Lawrence River. He is known as the "Father of New France".
Henry Hudson (1609): This person was an experienced English sailor, and discovered the Hudson River. This gave the Dutch claims to the surrounding area that would become New Amsterdam (and later New York). The Dutch also granted a private company, the Dutch West India Company, the right to control the region for economic gain.

Bartolome de Las Casas: This Spanish priest became an advocate for better treatment for Indians.
New Laws of 1542: These laws ended Indian Slavery, halted forced Indian labor, and began to end the encomienda system which kept the Indians in serfdom. However, conservative Spaniards, eager to keep the encomienda system, responded and successfully pushed the king to repeal parts of the New Laws.
Valladolid Debate (1550-1551): This debate took place in Valladolid, Spain, and was over the role for Indians in the Spanish colonies. There was no clear winner in this debate, but the encomienda system was not repealed fully.
Juan Gines de Sepulveda: This person argued that Indians were less than human and hence benefited from serving the Spaniards in the encomienda system. His opponent was Bartolome de Las Casas, who argued that the Indians were completely human and morally equal to Europeans, so enslaving them was not justified.

~Period 2: 1607-1754

~~Chapter 2: The Thirteen Colonies and the British empire, 1607-1754

Cecil Calvert, Lord Baltimore (1634): This was the person who implemented his father's plan and founded the colony of Maryland.
Act of Toleration (1649): This was the first colonial statute granting religious freedom to all Christians. However, this also called for the death of anyone who denied the divinity of Jesus. This was eventually repealed after a civil war between Protestants and Catholics, with Protestants winning.
Roger Williams; Providence (1636): This person was a Puritan minister and believed that the individual's conscience was beyond the control of any civil or church authority. He got kicked out of Massachusetts bay and went to found this settlement, southward to Narragansett Bay.
Anne Hutchinson; Antinomianism; Portsmouth: This person believed in this philosophy, which was the idea that faith alone, not deeds, is necessary for salvation. She was also banished from the Bay colony, and founded this colony, not far from Williams' colony of Providence.
Rhode Island: This colony was formed when Roger Williams was granted a charter from Parliament to join Providence and Portsmouth into a single colony.
Halfway covenant: This was a form of partial church membership, and was made because Reverend Solomon Stoddard felt that the people of the English colonies were drifting away from their original religious purpose.
Quakers: These were members of the Religious Society of Friends, and they believed in the equality of all men and women, nonviolence, and resistance to military service. They further believed that religious authority was found within each person's soul and not in the Bible and not in any outside source.
William Penn; Pennsylvania: This person was a young convert to the Quaker faith. He would eventually be granted American land for a colony that he called this.
Holy Experiment: This was an experiment by William Penn to put his Quaker beliefs to test in his colony. He wanted his colony to provide a religious refuge for Quakers and other persecuted people, to enact liberal ideas in government, and generate income and profits for himself.
Frame of Government (1682-1683): This was a guarantee of a representative assembly elected by landowners, provided by William Penn
Charter of Liberties: This was a written constitution written by William Penn, which guaranteed freedom of worship for all and unrestricted immigration.

Jamestown (1607): This was the first permanent English colony in America. It suffered from dysentery and malaria due to its swampy area along the James River. Also, many of the settlers were gentlemen unaccustomed to physical work, and others were gold-seeking adventurers who refused to hunt or farm. One key source of goods was trade with American Indians, but when conflicts erupted, trade would stop and settlers went hungry.
Captain John Smith: Leader of Jamestown in its first five years.
John Rolfe; Pocahontas: Through the efforts of this person and his Indian wife, Jamestown developed a new variety of tobacco that would become popular in Europe and become a profitable crop.
Separatists: These were radical dissenters to the Church of England because they wanted to organize a completely separate church that was independent of royal control.
Pilgrims: People who left England for Holland in search of religious freedom. (Someone on a religious journey).
Mayflower (1620): This was the ship that sailed for Virginia with a small group of pilgrims. It landed in Massachusetts, and rather than going to Jamestown as planned, the pilgrims decided to establish a new colony at Plymouth.
Plymouth Colony; Massachusetts Bay: These two colonies were formed through religious motivation. Both were settled by English Protestants who dissented from the official government-supported Church of England, also known as the Anglican Church. One consisted of Separatists and the other consisted of Puritans

John Winthrop: This person led about 1,000 puritans for the Massachusetts shore and founded Boston and several other towns
Great Migration (1630s): This was a massive movement caused by a civil war in England that drove some 15,000 more settlers to the Massachusetts Bay Colony
Thomas Hooker; Hartford (1636); Fundamental Orders of Connecticut (1639): This reverend led a large group of Boston Puritans into the Connecticut River Valley and founded this colony. The settlers at that colony then drew up the first written constitution in American history, known as this.
John Davenport; New Haven; Connecticut: This was a second settlement, led by this person, in the Connecticut Valley, south of Hartford. It joined with the more democratic Hartford settlers to form this colony.
New Hampshire: This was the last colony to be founded in New England. It was originally part of Massachusetts Bay, and consisted of a few settlements northern Boston. This colony was only created by King Charles II because he wanted to increase royal control of the colonies.

The Carolinas(1663, 1729): This became two royal colonies from the land that Charles II granted to eight nobles after they helped Charles regain the throne. This land was between Virginia and spanish Florida.
New York: This colony was taken from the Dutch after the king granted his brother, the Duke of York, the lands lying between Connecticut and Delaware Bay. This colony originally did not have a representative assembly, but was demanded by and given to colonists after the Duke started taxing them.
New Jersey (1664): This colony was split from New York by the Duke of York and given to Lord John Berkeley and Sir George Carteret. It was originally split into an east and west part, but eventually it was combined in 1702.
Delaware (1702): This colony was formed when William Penn granted the lower three counties of Pennsylvania their own assembly. The land would become a separate colony, even though its governor was the same as Pennsylvania's until the American Revolution.
Georgia: This colony was created with the purpose of creating a defensive buffer to protect the prosperous South Carolina plantations from the threat of Spanish Florida. It also was a place to keep the thousands of people in England who were in debt imprisoned.
James Oglethorpe (1733): This person was given a royal charter for a proprietary colony, and this person led a group of philanthropists to form Georgia's first settlement, Savannah. He eventually would give up on Georgia and let the British government take it over, leading to Georgia becoming a royal colony.

Metacom: This person was a chief of the Wampanoags, known to the colonists as King Philip.
King Philip's War (1675-1676): This is when King Philip united many tribes in southern New England against the English settlers, who were constantly encroaching on the American Indians' lands, and declared war. This war ended when King Philip was killed, and this ended most American Indian resistance in New England.

Mayflower Compact (1620): This was a document that pledged Pilgrims to make decisions by the will of the majority. This was an early form of colonial self-government and rudimentary written constitution.
Virginia House of Burgesses: This was the first representative assembly in America
Sir William Berkeley: This person was the royal governor of Virginia, and he used dictatorial powers to govern on behalf of the large planters. He antagonized small farmers on Virginia's western frontier because he failed to protect them from Indian attacks.
Nathaniel Bacon; Bacon's Rebellion: This person incited a rebellion because of his grievances against William Berkeley's government. He and others resented the economic and political control exercised by a few large planters in the Chesapeake area. This rebellion would illustrate two long-lasting disputes - (1) sharp class differences between the wealthy and poor, and (2) colonial resistance to royal control.
New England Confederation (1643): This is when four New England colonies (Plymouth, Massachusetts Bay, Connecticut, and New Haven) formed a military alliance known as this.

Corporate colonies: These were colonies that were operated by joint-stock companies, at least during these colonies' early years.
Royal colonies: These were colonies under the direct authority and rule of the king's government.
Proprietary colonies: These were colonies under the authority of individuals granted charters of ownership by the king.
Chesapeake colonies: These colonies were the subdivided Virginia colony. (Virginia and Maryland).
Joint-stock company: This is a company that pools the savings of many investors, thereby spreading the risk.

Mercantilism: This is an economic policy adopted by most European kingdoms in the 17th century. It looked upon trade, colonies, and the accumulation of wealth as the basis for a country's military and political strength.
Navigation Acts (1650-1673): These were three rules for colonial trade - (1) Trade to and from the colonies could be carried only by English or colonial-built ships. operated only be English or colonial crews. (2) All goods imported into the colonies, except for some perishables, had to pass through ports in England. (3). Specified or "enumerated" goods from the colonies could be exported to England only. (Tobacco was the original good, but the list eventually grew).
Dominion of New England (1685-1686): This was created when King James II combined New York, New Jersey, and the various New England colonies into a single unit. He did this because he was determined to increase royal control over the colonies by combining them into larger administrative units and doing away with their representative assemblies
Sir Edmund Andros: This person was sent from England to serve as the governor of the Dominion of New England. He was instantly unpopular because he levied taxes, limited town meetings, and revoked land titles.
Glorious Revolution (1688): This caused King James II to be overthrown and be replaced by two sovereigns, William and Mary. This would end the Dominion of New England.

Indentured servants: These were people who, under a contract with a master or landowner who paid for their passage, agreed to work for a specified period -- usually between four to seven years -- in return for room and board. These people were under the absolute rule of their masters until the end of their work period.
Headright system: This was a system designed to attract immigrants through offers of land. Virginia offered 50 acres of land to (1) each immigrant who paid for his own passage and (2) any plantation owner who paid for an immigrant's passage.
Slavery (1660): This process began for Americans when the Virginia House of Burgesses had enacted laws that discriminated between blacks and whites. These people were then kept in permanent bondage.
Triangular trade: This was a three-part process in which (1) a ship starting from a New England port would carry rum across the Atlantic to West Africa. There the rum would be traded for hundreds of captive Africans. (2) The ship would set out on the Middle Passage. The surviving Africans would be traded as slaves in the West Indies for a cargo of sugarcane. (3) The ship would return to a New England port where the sugar would be sold to be used in making rum.

~~Chapter 3: Colonial Society in the 18th Century

Benjamin Franklin; Poor Richard's Almanack (1732-1757): This person was the most popular and successful American writer of the 18th century. He wrote this book, which had several witty aphorisms and advice.
Established church: These were churches financed through the government.
Great Awakening (1730-1740s): This was a movement characterized by fervent expressions of religious feeling among masses of people.
Jonathan Edwards; "Sinners in the Hands of an Angry God": This Reverend expressed the Great Awakening ideas in a series of sermons. His most notable sermon, ___, argued that God was rightfully angry with human sinfulness. Each individual who expressed deep penitence could be saved by God's grace, but the souls who paid no heed to God's commandments would suffer eternal damnation.
Sectarian: This category of colleges promoted the doctrines of a particular religious group. The first one was Harvard in Cambridge, Massachusetts (1636), in order to give candidates for the ministry a proper theological and scholarly education.
Nonsectarian: This category of colleges had no religious sponsors. The only college during the 1700s that was this was The College of Philadelphia, which later became the University of Pennsylvania.

Subsistence farming: This type of farming involves farming just enough food for the farm family. Most work was done by family members and an occasional hired laborer.

J. Hector St. John Crevecoeur: This person wrote "Letters from an American Farmer" (1782). He was a Frenchman and observed a very different society from the struggling colonial villages that had existed in the 17th century.
Huguenots: This is another way of saying "French Protestant"

Hereditary aristocracy: This is the social system in Europe, where, with nobility, one would inherit special privileges, while masses of hungry poor had nothing.
John Peter Zenger: This person was a New York editor and publisher, and was brought to trial on a charge of libel(ously criticizing New York's royal governor).
Andrew Hamilton: This person was the lawyer for John Peter Zenger, and argued that while Zenger violated the law, he told the truth. In addition, he set the precedent for colonial rebellion by telling the juries that this is their chance to change American law to be different than English law.
Enlightenment (1700s): This was a European movement in literature and philosophy century. The leaders of this movement believed that the "darkness" of past ages could be corrected by the use of human reason in solving most of humanity's problems.
John Locke; Two Treatises of Government: This person was a 17th century English philosopher and political theorist. He wrote this book, which reasoned that while the state (the government) is supreme, it is bound to follow "natural laws" based on the rights that people have simply because they are human. He argued that sovereignty ultimately resides with the people rather than the state. Furthermore, he said that citizens had a right and an obligation to revolt against whatever government failed to protect their rights.

~Period 3: 1754-1800

~~Chapter 4: Imperial Wars and Colonial Protest, 1754-1774
Patrick Henry: This person was a young Virginia lawyer, and spoke for many when he stood up in the House of burgesses to demand that the king's government recognize the rights of all citizens -- including the right not to be taxed without representation.
Stamp Act Congress (1765): This was a meeting that consisted of 9 colonies, called by James Otis to protest the Stamp Act. It took place in New York, and they resolved that only their own elected representatives had the legal authority to approve taxes.
Sons and Daughters of Liberty: This was formed as a result of the Stamp Act Congress, and was a secret society organized for the purpose of intimidating tax agents. Members of this society sometimes destroyed revenue stamps and tarred and feathered revenue officials.
Declaration of Rights and Grievances (1765): This was a declaration written in Stamp Act Congress that declared that taxes imposed on British colonies without their formal consent was unconstitutional.
John Dickinson; "Letters From a Pennsylvania Farmer" (1767-1768): These letters wrote that Parliament could regulate commerce but argued that because duties were a form of taxation, they could not be levied on the colonies without the consent of their representative assemblies. This person argued that the idea of no taxation without representation was an essential principle of English law.
Samuel Adams; James Otis; Massachusetts Circular Letter (1768): These two people wrote this letter, which urged the various colonies to petition Parliament to repeal the Townshend Acts. British officials in Boston ordered the letter retracted, threatened to dissolve the legislature, and increased the number of British troops in Boston. This caused colonists to boycott British goods, and merchants to increase their smuggling activities.
Boston Massacre: This was when a crowd of colonists in Boston harassed the guards near the customs house. The guards fired into the crowd, killing 5 people, including an African American, Crispus Attucks. The soldiers were defended by colonial lawyer John Adams.
Committees of Correspondence (1772): These were committees that would regularly exchange letters about suspicious or potentially threatening British activities.
Gaspee (1772): This was a British customs ship that had caught several smugglers. One day, it ran aground off the shore of Rhode Island. Seizing their opportunity to destroy the hated vessel, a group of colonists disguised as American Indians, ordered the British crew ashore and then set fire to the ship.

Whigs: This was the dominant political party in Parliament, and they wanted the American colonies to bear more of the cost of maintaining the British Empire.
Salutary neglect: This is a policy where Britain exercised little direct control over the colonies and had generally allowed its navigation laws regulating colonial trade to go unenforced.
Lord Frederick North: The new prime minister that urged Parliament to repeal the Townshend Acts because they damaged trade and generated a disappointingly small amount of revenue.

Pontiac; Pontiac's Rebellion: This was when this Indian Chief led a major attack against colonial settlements on the western frontier. The American Indians were angered by the growing westward movement of European settlers onto their land and by the British refusal to offer gifts as the French had done. This rebellion destroyed forts and settlements from New York to Virginia. The British sent regular British troops to put down this rebellion, rather than relying on colonial forces to retaliate.
Proclamation of 1763: This was an effort to stabilize the western frontier, and is when the British government prohibited colonists from settling west of the Appalachian Mountains.

Seven Years' War (French and Indian War) (1754): This war between Britain and France began when the French built a chain of forts in the Ohio River Valley to halt the westward growth of the British colonies. Hoping to stop the French, the governor of Virginia sent a small militia under Colonel George Washington. Washington accidentally killed the French ambassador Jumonville in the Jumonville affair. This caused George Washington to create Fort Necessity, a tiny fort. However, Washington was overwhelmed and forced to surrender and sign a treaty that said that George Washington was guilty of starting the war.
Albany Plan of Union (1754): This plan was developed by Benjamin Franklin and provided for an intercolonial government and a system for recruiting troops and collecting taxes from the various colonies for their common defense. However, each colony was too jealous of its own taxation powers to accept the plan, and the plan never took effect.
Edward Braddock: This was a general of the colonies in the French and Indian War that was defeated near Ft. Duquesne.
William Pitt: This was the British prime minister during the Seven Years' War. He concentrated the government's military strategy on conquering Canada, eventually taking over Quebec with General James Wolfe (1759), and Montreal (1760).
Peace of Paris (1763): This treaty gave Great Britain both French Canada and Spanish Florida. France gave up to Spain its huge western territory, Louisiana, and claims west of the Mississippi River in compensation for Spain's loss of Florida. With this treaty, the British extended their control of North America, and French power on the continent virtually ended.

Sugar Act (Revenue Act) (1764): This act placed duties on foreign sugar and certain luxuries. Its chief purpose was to raise money for the crown, and a companion law also provided for stricter enforcement of the Navigation Acts to stop smuggling.
Quartering Act (1765): This act required the colonists to provide food and living quarters for British soldiers stationed in the colonies.
Stamp Act (1765): This act required that revenue stamps be placed on most printed paper in the colonies, including all legal documents, newspapers, pamphlets, and advertisements, and was an effort to raise funds to support British military forces in the colonies. This was the first direct tax collected from those who used the goods.
Declaratory Act (1766): This act asserted that Parliament had the right to tax and make laws for the colonies "in all cases whatsoever." This policy would soon lead to renewed conflict between the colonists and the British government.
Townshend Acts (1767): This act enacted new duties to be collected on colonial imports of tea, glass, and paper. It also required that the revenues raised be used to pay crown officials in the colonies, thus making them independent of the colonial assemblies that had previously paid their salaries. This also provided for the search of private homes for smuggled goods.
Writs of Assistance: This was what was needed to conduct a search through private homes, rather than a judge's warrant permitting a search only of a specifically named property.
Tea Act (1773): This act made the price of the British East India Company's tea cheaper than that of smuggled Dutch tea. Many colonists still refused to buy the tea because that would recognize Parliament's right to tax the colonies.
Boston Tea Party (1773): This was when Bostonians disguised themselves as American Indians, boarded the British ships, and dumped 342 chests of tea into the harbor. While many applauded this as a justifiable defense of liberty, others thought the destruction of private property was far too radical.
Coercive Acts (Intolerable Acts) (1774): There were four of these acts, directed mainly at punishing the people of Boston and Massachusetts and bringing the dissidents under control. The fourth law (no name) expanded the Quartering Act to enable British troops to be quartered in private homes. It applied to all colonies.
Port Act (1774): This act closed the port of Boston, prohibiting trade in and out of the harbor until the destroyed tea was paid for. This was the first Coercive act.
Massachusetts Government Act (1774): This act reduced the power of the Massachusetts legislature while increasing the power of the royal governor. This was the second Coercive act.
Administration of Justice Act (1774): This act allowed royal officials accused of crimes to be tried in Great Britain instead of in the colonies. This was the third Coercive act.
Quebec Act (1774): This act established Roman Catholicism as the official religion of Quebec, set up a government without a representative assembly, and extended Quebec's boundary to the Ohio River.

Deism: This is a belief that God had established natural laws in creating the universe, but that the role of divine intervention in human affairs was minimal. They believed in rationalism and trusted human reason to solve the many problems of life and society, and emphasized reason, science, and respect for humanity.
Jean-Jacques Rousseau: This was a French philosopher who believed in Deism, was a part of the Enlightenment, and influenced revolutionary thought before the American Revolution.

~~Chapter 5: The American Revolution and Confederation

Radicals: This was the radical faction during the pre-revolutionary war and included Patrick Henry (Vir), Samuel Adams (Mass), and John Adams (Mass).
Moderates: This faction during the pre-revolutionary war included George Washington (Vir) and John Dickinson (Penn)
Conservatives: This was the conservative faction that favored a mild statement of protest and included John Jay (NY), and Joseph Galloway (Penn).

First Continental Congress (1774): This was a convention in Philadelphia, and its purpose was to respond to what the delegates viewed as Britain's alarming threats to their liberties. Most Americans had no desire for independence, and simply wanted to protest parliamentary infringements of their rights and restore the relationship with the crown that had existed before the Seven Years' War. The delegates agreed to meet again in May 1775 if colonial rights were not recognized.
Galloway Plan of Union (1774): This was a plan similar to the Albany Plan of 1754, that would have reordered relations with Parliament and formed a union of the colonies within the British empire. This plan failed to pass by only one vote.
Suffolk Resolves (1774): This was a statement originally issued by Massachusetts, and called for the immediate repeal of the Intolerable Acts and for colonies to resist them by making military preparations and boycotting British goods.
Declaration and Resolves (Declaration of Rights and Grievances) (1774): This was a petition that urged the king to make right colonial grievances and restore colonial rights. This was backed by moderate delegates, and recognized Parliament's authority to regulate commerce
Continental Association (1774): This was a network of committees to enforce the economic sanctions of the Suffolk Resolves.
Second Continental Congress (1775): This was a meeting in Philadelphia where delegates from New England thought the colonies should declare their independence, while another group, mainly from the middle colonies, hoped the conflict could be resolved by negotiating a new relationship with Great Britain.
Olive Branch Petition (1775): This was sent by delegates at the Second Continental Congress (1775) to King George III, in which they pledged their loyalty and asked the king to intercede with Parliament to secure peace and the protection of colonial rights.

Declaration of the Causes and Necessities for Taking Up Arms (1775): This declaration called on the colonies to provide troops. It appointed George Washington as the commander-in-chief of the new colonial army and they were sent to Boston to lead the Massachusetts militia and volunteer units from other colonies.
Thomas Jefferson; Declaration of Independence (1776): This person, along with four other delegates, wrote this declaration, which listed specific grievances against George III's government and also expressed the basic principles that justified revolution. Richard Henry Lee of Virginia provoked this to happen after delivering his resolution.
George Washington: This person was the 1st president of the United States

Land Ordinance of 1785: This was a policy for surveying and selling western lands. It provided for setting aside one section of land in each township for public education.
Northwest Ordinance of 1787: This was a law that set the rules for creating new states. This granted limited self-government to the developing territory and prohibited slavery in the region.

Paul Revere; William Dawes (1775): These two people warned that a large force, led by General Thomas Gage, were being sent to seize colonial military supplies in the town of Concord.
Lexington: This was the place of the first skirmish of the American Revolution. Americans were forced to retreat under heavy British fire and eight Americans were killed.
Concord: This was the destination of General Thomas Gage and he succeeded in destroying some military supplies. However, on the way back, his soldiers were attacked by hundreds of militiamen firing at them from stone walls. The British suffered 250 casualties and also considerable humiliation at being so badly mauled by "amateur" fighters.
Battle of Bunker Hill (1775): This was a true battle fought between Americans and the British on the outskirts of Boston. Americans fortified Breed's Hill while a British force attacked the Americans' position and managed to take the Hill. Even though the British won, this was seen as a win for Americans because they succeeded in inflicting heavy losses on the attacking British army.
Battle of Saratoga (1777): This was a turning point for the American revolutionaries in upstate New York. It was won when General John Burgoyne marched from Canada to link up with other forces from the west and south. Their objective was to cut off New England from the rest of the colonies. But, Burgoyne was cut off and attacked by troops commanded by American generals Horatio Gates and Benedict Arnold, forcing Burgoyne to surrender. This was more important in the diplomatic result, because after hearing about the American victory, France joined in the war against Britain to try to weaken England, France's traditional foe. A year later, Spain and Holland would also enter the war against Britain. The French alliance proved a decisive factor in the American struggle for independence because it widened the war and forced the British to divert military resources away from America.
George Rogers Clark (1778-1779): This General led the Patriots and captured a series of British forts in the Illinois country to gain control of parts of the vast Ohio territory.
Battle of Yorktown (1781): This was the last major battle of the Revolutionary War. Strongly supported by French naval and military forces, Washington's army forced the surrender of a large British army commanded by General Charles Cornwallis.
Articles of Confederation (1777, 1781): This was the first constitution for the United States as a nation, written by John Dickinson. It gave Congress the power to wage war, make treaties, send diplomatic representatives, and borrow money. However, Congress did not have the power to regulate commerce or to collect taxes. To finance any of its decisions, the congress had to rely upon taxes voted by each state. Neither did the government have executive power to enforce its laws.

Prohibitory Act (1775): This act declared the colonies to be in a state of rebellion. Later, Parliament would forbid all trade and shipping between Britain and the colonies.
Treaty of Paris (1783): This was the peace treaty that ended the American Revolutionary War. It provided (1) Britain would recognize the existence of the United States as an independent nation. (2) The Mississippi River would be the western boundary of that nation. (3) Americans would have fishing rights off the coast of Canada. (4) Americans would pay debts owed to British merchants and honor Loyalist claims for property confiscated during the war.

Thomas Paine; Common Sense: This person wrote this pamphlet that argued that the colonies should become independent states and break all political ties with the British monarchy. He argued that it was illogical for a large continent to be ruled by a small and distant island and for people to pledge allegiance to a king whose government was corrupt and whose laws were unreasonable.
Patriots: These were the 40 percent of the colonial population that actively participated in the struggle against Britain in the American Revolution. Most came from the New England states and Virginia, but most of the soldiers were reluctant to travel outside their own region. They would serve in local militia units for short periods, leave to work their farms, and then return to duty.
Loyalists (Tories): These were the 20-30 percent of the colonial population that sided with the British during the American Revolution. They supplied British soldiers with arms and food, and joined in raiding parties that pillaged revolutionist homes and farms.
Valley Forge (1777-1778): This was the place that Washington's troops suffered through a severe winter in Pennsylvania. However, most of his troops were trained by Prussian General Baron Von Steuben and thus were better military fighters.
Abigail Adams: This person was the wife of John Adams and "desired [he] would remember the ladies and be more generous and favorable to them than your ancestors".
Deborah Sampson: This woman passed as a man and served as a soldier in the American Revolutionary War.
Mary McCauley (Molly Pitcher): This woman fought in the American Revolutionary War, taking her husband's place at the Battle of Monmouth.
Daniel Shays; Shays' Rebellion (1786-1787): This person was a Massachusetts farmer and Revolutionary War veteran, and he led other farmers in this uprising against high state taxes, imprisonment for debt, and lack of paper money. The rebel farmers stopped the collection of taxes and forced the closing of debtors' courts. When this person attempted to seize weapons from the Springfield armory, the state militia of Massachusetts broke this rebellion.

~~Chapter 6: The Constitution and the New Republic, 1787-1800

Federalists: These were supporters of the Constitution and its strong federal government. These were most common along the Atlantic Coast and in the large cities. This eventually became a party that supported Hamilton and his financial program. The party was centered in the northeastern states and advocated the growth of federal power.
Anti-Federalists: These were opposers of the Constitution. These people tended to be small farmers and settlers on the western frontier.
The Federalist Papers: These were a series of highly persuasive essays written for a New York paper by James Madison, Alexander Hamilton, and John Jay. There were a total of 85 essays, and they presented cogent reasons for believing in the practicality of each major provision of the Constitution.
Bill of Rights: This was added to the Constitution to gain the support of Anti-Federalists. It added the first 10 amendments to the Constitution, listing people's rights.
1st Amendment: This gave people the freedom of speech, religion, press, the right to peaceably assemble, and petition the Government for a redress of grievances.
2nd Amendment: This gave people the right to keep and bear arms.
3rd Amendment: This protected the people from the government allowing soldiers to stay in civilian homes without the consent of the Owner unless it is during a time of war.
4th Amendment: This protected people from being searched and seized unreasonably.
5th Amendment: This allowed people the right to a grand jury,  remain silent, and stopped double jeopardy from happening, guaranteed rights of citizens to be preserved, and required the government to compensate citizens when it takes private property for public use.
6th Amendment: This guaranteed the right to a speedy and public trial by an impartial jury, to know who your accusers are and what they charged you for, and the right to a lawyer .
7th Amendment: This guaranteed a trial by jury in civil cases in the federal government, and does not allow a court to overturn a jury's findings of fact.
8th Amendment: This stopped the federal government from imposing excessive bail, excessive fines, or cruel and unusual punishment.
9th Amendment: This ensured that the Bill of Rights was not seen as granting the people of the United States only the specific rights it addressed.
10th Amendment: This said that the powers not provided by the Constitution go to the states or the people.

Washington's Farewell Address: This was a message by President Washington, and it spoke about policies and practices that he considered unwise. He warned Americans (1) not to get involved in European affairs, (2) not to make "permanent alliances" in foreign affairs, (3) not to form political parties, and (4) not to fall into sectionalism.
Alien and Sedition Acts (1798): These were three separate acts that the Federalists passed to try to restrict their political opponents during the French Revolution.
Naturalization Act (1798): This act increased from 5 to 14 the years required for immigrants to qualify for U.S. citizenship.
Alien Acts (1798): This act authorized the president to deport aliens considered dangerous and to detain enemy aliens in time of war.
Sedition Act (1798): This act made it illegal for newspaper editors to criticize either the president or Congress and imposed fines or imprisonment for editors who violated the law.
Kentucky and Virginia Resolutions (1799): These laws declared that the states had entered into a "compact" in forming the national government, and, therefore, if any act of the federal broke the compact, a state could nullify the federal law.

Hamilton's Financial Plan (1791): This was a plan for putting U.S. finances on a stable foundation. It's three parts were (1) Pay off the national debt at face value and have the federal government assume the war debts of the states. (2) Protect the young nation's "infant" (new and developing) industries and collect adequate revenues at the same time by imposing high tariffs on imported goods. (3) Create a national bank for depositing government funds and printing banknotes that would provide the basis for a stable U.S. currency. However, to get Jefferson's support, the nation's capital had to be moved to the South, which would later be named Washington, D.C..
National bank: This was created by Hamilton's Financial Plan (1791), and created controversy over whether it was constitutional. Alexander Hamilton took a broad view of the Constitution, arguing that the document's "necessary and proper" clause authorized Congress to do whatever was necessary to carry out its enumerated powers. Jefferson, on the other hand, argued that the Constitution did not give Congress the power to create this.

Battle of Fallen Timbers (1794): This was a battle between Americans and American Indians, where General Anthony Wayne defeated the Confederacy tribes in northern Ohio. Americans were suspicious that Britain was supplying the American Indians with arms and encouraging them to attack the "intruding" Americans.
Treaty of Greenville (1795): This was signed by the chiefs of defeated American Indians, in which they surrendered claims to the Ohio Territory and promised to open it up to settlement.
Public Land Act (1796): This act established orderly procedures for dividing and selling federal lands at reasonable prices.

Mt. Vernon Conference (1785): This was a conference at George Washington's home to review what could be done about the country's inability to overcome critical problems. Representatives from Virginia, Maryland, Delaware, and Pennsylvania agreed to hold further discussions at a later meeting in Maryland, at which all the states might be represented.
Annapolis Convention (1786): Only five states sent delegates to this convention. After discussing ways to improve commercial relations among the states, James Madison and Alexander Hamilton persuaded the others that another convention should be held in Philadelphia for the purpose of revising the Articles of Confederation.
Constitutional Convention (1787): This was a convention that called upon all 13 states to send delegates to Philadelphia "for the sole and express purpose of revising the Articles of Confederation." Only Rhode Island, not trusting the other states, refused to send delegates.
Checks and balances: This is a system such that the power of each branch would be limited by the powers of the others.
Virginia Plan (1787): This plan favored large states, and said that larger states should have proportionally more representatives in Congress than smaller states.
New Jersey Plan (1787): This plan favored smaller states, and called for equal number of representatives in Congress for every state.
Connecticut Plan; Great Compromise (1787): This compromise, made by Roger Sherman, provided for a two-house Congress. In the Senate, states would have equal representation, but in the House of Representatives, each state would be represented according to the size of its population.
Three-fifths Compromise (1787): This compromise counted each enslaved individual as three-fifths of a person for the purposes of determining a state's level of taxation and representation. It also decided to guarantee that slaves could be imported for at least 20 years longer, until 1808. This could be abolished by Congress at any time.
Commercial Compromise (1787): This compromise allowed Congress to regulate interstate and foreign commerce including placing tariffs (taxes) on foreign imports, but it prohibited placing taxes on any exports.
Electoral college system (1787): This system assigned each state to a number of electors equal to the total of that state's representatives and senators. This system was instituted because the delegates feared that too much democracy might lead to mob rule.

Judiciary Act (1789): This act established a Supreme Court with one chief justice and five associate justices. This highest court was empowered to rule on the constitutionality of decisions made by state courts. The act also provided for a system of 13 district courts and three circuit courts of appeals.
Whiskey Rebellion (1794): This was a revolt of a group of farmers who refused to pay the federal excise tax on whiskey that was raised by Alexander Hamilton. Washington responded to this crisis by federalizing 15,000 state militiamen and placing them under the command of Alexander Hamilton. Hamilton succeeded in crushing the rebellion with almost no bloodshed, which was seen as a victory for the new government.
Democratic-Republican party: This was a party that supported Jefferson and tried to elect candidates in different states who opposed Hamilton's program. Most of these people were from the southern states and on the western frontier and argued for states' rights.
John Adams: This person was the second president of the United States, Federalist, and his Vice President was Thomas Jefferson.
Revolution of 1800: This was the change from Federalist to Democratic-Republican control peacefully.

Proclamation of Neutrality (1793): This was created because President Washington did not believe that America was strong enough to engage in a European war. He issued this to avoid conflict, causing Jefferson to resign from his cabinet.
"Citizen" Genet: This person was the French minister to the United States, and he broke all the normal rules of diplomacy by appealing directly to the American people to support the French cause. This caused him to be recalled by the French government, but he stayed in the United States, married and became a U.S. citizen.
John Jay; Jay Treaty (1794): This person was sent on a mission to talk Britain out of its offensive practice of searching and seizing American ships and impressing seamen into the British navy. The effect was this treaty, in which Britain agreed to evacuate its posts on the U.S. western frontier, but said nothing about the impressment issue.
Pinckney Treaty (1795): This person negotiated this treaty with Spain, in which Spain agreed to open the lower Mississippi River and New Orleans to American trade. The right of deposit was granted to Americans so that they could transfer cargoes in New Orleans without paying duties to the Spanish government. Spain further agreed to accept the U.S. claim that Florida's northern boundary should be at the 31st parallel (not north of that line, as Spain had formerly insisted).
XYZ affair: This was when President John Adams sent a delegation to Paris to negotiate with the French government because many Americans were angered by reports that U.S. merchant ships were being seized by French warships and privateers. 3 of French ministers requested bribes as the basis for entering negotiations, and American delegates indignantly refused. This caused many Americans to clamor for war against France with their slogan "Millions for defense, but not one cent for tribute".

~Period 4: 1800-1848

~~Chapter 7: The Age of Jefferson, 1800-1816

Thomas Jefferson: This person was the 3rd president of the United States
Louisiana Purchase (1803): This was when President Thomas Jefferson bought the land up to the Mississippi River from Napoleon because (1) Napoleon needed to concentrate French resources on fighting England and (2) a rebellion led by Toussaint l'Ouverture against French rule on the island of Santo Domingo had resulted in heavy French losses. Napoleon needed funding for the war against Britain, and offered to sell this territory for $15 million.
War hawks: Led by Henry Clay and John C. Calhoun, these are the congressman who want war with Britain because war with Britain would be the only way to defend American honor, gain Canada, and destroy American indian resistance on the frontier.
Tecumseh; Prophet: These two indians, one being a warrior and the other a religious leader, attempted to unite all of the tribes east of the Mississippi river.
William Henry Harrison: This person was the governor of the Indiana Territory, and called upon by white settlers to take aggressive action. He would also become the 9th president of the United States
Battle of Tippecanoe (1811): In this battle, William Henry Harrison destroyed the Shawnee headquarters and put an end to Tecumseh's efforts to form an Indian confederacy.
John Marshall: This person was the first Chief Justice of the Supreme Court. He held his post for 34 years, in which time he exerted as strong an influence on the Supreme Court as Washington exerted on the presidency. His decisions in many landmark cases generally strengthened the central government, often at the expense of states' rights.
Judicial review: This is the power of the Supreme Court to decide whether an act of Congress or of the president was allowed by the Constitution. The Supreme Court could now overrule actions of the other two branches of the federal government
Marbury v. Madison (1803): This court case was caused by Secretary of State James Madison not delivering commissions to the "midnight justices". However, one justice sued for his commission, saying that he had a right to his commission. John Marshall ruled that according to the Judiciary Act (1789), the justice had the right to his commission, but the Judiciary Act of 1789 was unconstitutional because it gave the Supreme Court more power than the Constitution allowed. Therefore, the justice would not receive his commission.
"Quids": This was the old Democratic-Republicans, and they accused Jefferson of abandoning Democratic-Republican principles. These people did not like the War of 1812 and thought it was just a fight for more land.
Federalist Conspiracy (1804): This is when Aaron Burr formed a secret political pact with some radical New England Federalists. He planned to win the governorship of New York in 1804, unite that state with the New England states, and then lead this group of states to secede from the nation. This conspiracy failed when Hamilton was elected in the New York Election.
Burr Conspiracy (1806): This is when Aaron Burr made a plan to take Mexico from Spain and possibly unite it with Louisiana under his rule. Jefferson ordered Burr's arrest, and trial for treason, but John Marshall acquitted Burr, basing its decision on Marshall's narrow definition of treason and the lack of witnesses to any "overt act" by Burr.
Hartford Convention (1814): This was a convention where the New England states threatened to secede from the Union. New England radical Federalists hated the War of 1812, so they urged that the Constitution be amended so that there must be a two-thirds vote of both houses for any future declaration of war.
Barbary war (1801-1805): This was when President Jefferson decided to stop paying ransom to African nations as previous presidents did. He sent the U.S. Navy to the Mediterranean and fought with Tripoli. Although the American navy did not achieve a decisive victory, it did gain some respect and also offered a measure of protection to U.S. vessels trading in Mediterranean waters.
Impressment: This is the British practice of capturing U.S. sailors who it claimed were British citizens and forcing them to serve in the British navy.
Chesapeake-Leopard affair (1807): This is when the British warship Leopard fired on the U.S. warship Chesapeake off a few miles off the coast of Virginia. Anti-British feeling ran high, and many Americans demanded war. Jefferson, however, resorted to diplomacy and economic pressure as his response to the crisis.
Embargo Act (1807): This act prohibited American merchant ships from sailing to any foreign port. This backfired and brought a devastating economic hardship to the United States than to Britain.
James Madison: This person was the 4th president of the United States, and was previously the Secretary of State for President Jefferson.
Nonintercourse Act (1809): This act tried to end the economic hardship for the U.S. while maintaining U.S.'s rights as a neutral nation. It allowed trade with all foreign nations besides Britain and France.
Macon's Bill No. 2 (1810): This bill was created when Madison made proposition to trade with either Britain or France if they formally agreed to respect their neutral trading rights at sea, and then the United States would prohibit trade with that nation's foe. France jumped on this opportunity, but Madison soon found out that Napoleon had no intention of fulfilling his promise.
War of 1812: This war was declared because of British delays in meeting U.S. demands over neutral rights combined with political pressures from the War Hawks. Ironically, the British government had agreed to suspend its naval blockade by this time.

"Old Ironsides": This was a U.S. warship that raised American morale by defeating and sinking a British ship off the coast of Nova Scotia. American privateers, motivated by both patriotism and profit, captured numerous British merchant ships.
Battle of Lake Erie (1813); Oliver Hazard Perry: This was the most important naval battle in the war of 1812 because it kept the British navy out of the north. This captain, declared victory with "We have met the enemy and they are ours."
Battle of the Thames River (1813): This was a win for General William Henry Harrison, in which Tecumseh was killed.
Thomas Macdonough; Battle of Lake Champlain (1814): This was when this general defeated a British fleet in the war of 1812. As a result, the British had to retreat and abandon their plan to invade New York and New England.
Andrew Jackson; Battle of Horseshoe Bend(1814): This U.S. General fought this battle in present-day Alabama, and ended the power of an important British ally, the Creek nation. The victory eliminated the Indians and opened new lands to white settlers.
Battle of New Orleans (1815): This was a battle led by Andrew Jackson leading a force of frontier soldiers, free African Americans, and Creoles, halting the British effort to control the Mississippi River. However, this battle was pointless because the treaty ending the War of 1812 had already been signed two weeks earlier.
Treaty of Ghent (1814-1815): This treaty ended the War of 1812 and halted fighting, returned all conquered territory to the prewar claimant, and recognized the prewar boundary between Canada and the United States.

Lewis and Clark Expedition (1804-1806): This was an expedition that began in St. Louis, crossed the Rockies, reached the Oregon coast on the Pacific Ocean, then turned back and completed the journey. This gave greater geographic and scientific knowledge of the region, stronger U.S. claims to the Oregon Territory, better relations with American Indians, and more accurate maps and land routes for fur trappers and future settlers.

Francis Scott Key; "The Star-Spangled Banner": This person wrote this poem after the British failed to take Baltimore because Fort McHenry held out after a night's bombardment.

~~Chapter 8: Nationalism and Economic Development, 1816-1848

Era of Good Feelings: This is the period when James Monroe was in office because his presidency was marked by a spirit of nationalism, optimism, and goodwill. In addition, there was only one political party at the time. However, there were many heated debates over tariffs, the national bank, internal improvements, and public land sales, as well as sectionalist tensions over slavery. Eventually, the Democratic-Republican party would be split into two.
James Monroe: This person was the 5th president

Tariff of 1816: This tariff raised taxes for the express purpose of protecting U.S. manufacturers from competition after American manufacturers feared that british goods would be dumped on American markets after the War of 1812.
Henry Clay; American System: This person created this system, which was a comprehensive method for advancing the nation's economic growth. His plan consisted of three part - (1) protective tariffs, (2) a national bank, and (3) internal improvement.
Panic of 1819: This was an economic panic caused by the Second Bank of the United States, after it tightened credit in a belated effort to control inflation. Many state banks closed and unemployment, bankruptcies, and imprisonment for debt increased sharply. The depression was most severe in the West, where many people were in debt because they speculated on land during the postwar euphoria.
Lancaster Turnpike (1790s): This road connected Philadelphia with the rich farmlands around Lancaster. Its success stimulated the construction of other privately built and relatively short toll roads that, by the mid-1820s, connected most of the country's major cities.
National (Cumberland) Road (1811-1850s): This was a paved highway and major route to the west extending more than a thousand miles from Maryland to Illinois. It used both federal and state money, with the different states receiving ownership of segments of the highway.
Erie Canal (1825): This canal linked the economies of western farms and eastern cities. The success of this canal in stimulating economic growth touched off a frenzy of canal-building in other states. Improved transportation meant lower food prices in the East, more immigrants settling in the West, and stronger economic ties between the two sections.
Robert Fulton; steamboats (1807): This person invented this type of boat, and successfully voyaged up the Hudson River. These boats eventually made round-trip shipping on the nation's great rivers both faster and cheaper.
Railroads: These were created in the 1820s, and in the 1830s competed directly with canals as an alternative method for carrying passengers and freight. These helped small western towns such as Cleveland, Cincinnati, Detroit, and Chicago turn into booming commercial centers of the expanding national economy.
Eli Whitney: This person is known for inventing the cotton gin in 1793, and devising a system for making rifles out of interchangeable parts during the War of 1812. Interchangeable parts then became the basis for mass production methods in the new northern factories.
Samuel Slater: This person brought with him the British secrets for building cotton-spinning machines, and put this knowledge to work by helping establish the first U.S. factory in 1791.
Lowell system: This was a system that recruited young farm women to work in textile mills and housed them in company dormitories. Many factories in the 1830s would imitate this system and eventually incorporate child labor, and later, immigrants in large numbers.
Unions: These were organized in major cities as early as the 1790s and increased in number as the factory system took hold. Many discontented factory workers would join these in order to reduce the workday to 10 hours. However, there were many obstacles, including (1) immigrant replacement workers, (2) state laws outlawing these, and (3) frequent economic depressions with high unemployment.
Cotton gin(1793): This transformed the agriculture of the whole south because now they could easily separate the cotton fiber from the seeds, which made southern planters find cotton more profitable than tobacco and indigo, the leading crops of the colonial period. This caused more slaves and new land to be bought, and more shipping to Britain's textile factories.
Market Revolution: This was a revolution for America, moving its economy away from agriculture, and more towards industrialization and modern capitalism. The farmers fed the workers in the cities, who in turn provided farm families with an array of mass-produced goods.

Fletcher v. Peck (1810): This was a court case involving land fraud in Georgia, and Marshall concluded that a state could not pass legislation invalidating a contract. This was the first time that the Supreme court declared a state law to be unconstitutional and invalid.
Martin v. Hunter's Lessee (1816): This was a court case where the Supreme court established that it had jurisdiction over state courts in cases involving constitutional rights.
Dartmouth College v. Woodward (1819): This was a court case that involved a law of New Hampshire that changed Dartmouth College from a privately chartered college into a public institution. The Supreme court struck down the state law as unconstitutional, arguing that a contract for a private corporation could not be altered by the state.
McCulloch v. Maryland (1819): This was a court case where Maryland attempted to tax the Second Bank of the United States located in Maryland. Marshall ruled that a state could not tax a federal institution because "the power to tax is the power to destroy," and federal laws are supreme over state laws. In addition, this court case ruled that the National Bank was constitutional because even though no clause in the Constitution specifically mentions a national bank, the Constitution gave the federal government the implied power to create one.
Cohens v. Virginia (1821): This was a court case where a pair of brothers were convicted in Virginia of illegally selling lottery tickets for a lottery authorized by Congress for Washington, D.C.. Marshall and the court upheld the conviction, establishing the principle that the Supreme Court could review a state court's decision involving any of the powers of the federal government.
Gibbons v. Ogden (1821): This court case ruled that the state of New York could not grant a monopoly to a steamboat company if that action conflicted with a charter authorized by Congress. By ruling this unconstitutional, Marshall established the federal government's broad control of interstate commerce.
Tallmadge Amendment (1819): This was the start of the Missouri debate of whether it should be a free state or a slave state. It called for (1) prohibiting the further introduction of slaves into Missouri and (2) requiring the children of Missouri slaves to be emancipated at the age of 25.If adopted, this would have led to the gradual elimination of slavery in Missouri, but Southern states saw it as the first step in a northern effort to abolish slavery in all states.
Missouri Compromise (1820): This was a compromise by Henry Clay that (1) admitted Missouri as a slave-holding state, (2) admitted Maine as a free state, and (3) prohibited slavery in the rest of the Louisiana Territory north of latitude 36 degrees 30'.

Stephen Decatur: When problems with the Barbary pirates developed a second time, this person led a fleet in 1815 to force the rulers of North Africa to allow American shipping the free use of the Mediterranean.
Rush-Bagot Agreement (1817): This was when Britain and the United States agreed to strictly limit their naval armament on the Great Lakes. It would also place limits on border fortifications.
Treaty of 1818: This was a treaty between the United States and Britain that provided for (1) shared fishing rights off the coast of Newfoundland, (2) joint occupation of the Oregon Territory for 10 years, and the setting of the northern limits of the Louisiana Territory at the 49th parallel, thus establishing the western U.S.-Canada boundary line.
Florida Purchase Treaty / Adams-Onis Treaty (1819): This treaty was formed because Spain was worried that the United States would seize Florida after Jackson led a force of militia into Florida, destroying Seminole villages and capturing Pensacola, a Spanish city. Spain decided to get the best possible terms for Florida because it was also busy with troubles in Latin America. This treaty turned over all of its possessions in Florida and its own claims in the Oregon Territory to the United States, and in exchange, the United States agreed to assume $5 million in claims against Spain and give up any U.S. territorial claims to the Spanish province of Texas.
Monroe Doctrine (1823): This was created when Roger Canning, in his Canning proposal, asked the United States to form a joint Anglo-American warning to the European powers not to intervene in South America. However, Secretary of State John Quincy Adams believed that joint action with Britain would restrict U.S. opportunities for further expansion in the hemisphere, and JQA convinced Monroe to issue a statement to the world that did not have Britain as a coauthor because (1) if the United States acted alone, Britain could be counted upon the stand behind the U.S. policy and (2) no European power would risk going to war in South America, and if it did, the British navy would defeat the aggressor.

~~Chapter 9: Sectionalism, 1820-1860

Supreme Order of the Star-Spangled Banner: This was a secret antiforeign society filled with nativists who feared that the newcomers would take their jobs and also weaken the culture of the Anglo majority. Most nativists were Protestants who distrusted the Roman Catholicism practiced by the Irish and many of the Germans. This society eventually turned into the Know-Nothing Party, or the American party.
Planters: These were the rich southerners at the top of society. They owned at least 100 slaves and at least 1,000 acres. They maintained their power by dominating the state legislatures of the South and enacted laws that favored the large landholders' economic interests.
Codes of Chivalry: This was a code of chivalrous conduct, which included a strong sense of personal honor, the defense of womanhood, and paternalistic attitudes toward all who were deemed inferior, especially slaves.
Hillbillies: This was a nickname for poor whites in the South's population that could not afford the rich river-bottom farmland controlled by the planters, and many lived in the hills as subsistence farmers. Even though they had no slaves, they defended the slave system, thinking that someday they too could own slaves and that at least they were superior on the social scale to someone (slaves).
Mountain farmers: These were a number of small farmers that lived in frontier conditions in isolation from the rest of the South, along the slopes and valleys of the Appalachian and Ozark mountains. These people disliked the planters and their slaves. During the Civil War, many (including future president Andrew Johnson) would remain loyal to the Union.

Irish: This group of immigrants immigrated to the United States in massive groups due to a potato famine.
"Peculiar institution" / Gag Rule: This was another way of referring to slavery because some whites were sensitive about how they treated the other humans.
Denmark Vesey (1822); Nat Turner (1831): These two people led separate slave uprisings. The revolts were quickly and violently suppressed, but they still gave hope to enslaved African Americans, drove southern states to tighten their already strict slave codes, and demonstrated to many the evils of slavery.
Slave codes: These were sets of laws during the colonial period and in individual states after the American Revolution which defined the status of slaves and the rights and responsibilities of slave owners.
Code of Chivalry: This was a code of conduct for southern gentlemen which included a strong sense of personal honor, the defense of womanhood, and paternalistic attitudes toward all who were deemed inferior, especially slaves.

Commonwealth v. Hunt: This was a court case that ruled that "peaceful unions" had the right to negotiate labor contracts with employers.
Cyrus McCormick; John Deere: This person invented the mechanical reaper, and this other person invented the steel plow. These inventions made a farm family more efficient and allowed them to plant more acres, needing to supplement its labor only with a few hired workers at harvest time.

~~Chapter 10: The Age of Jackson, 1824-1844

Indian Removal Act (1830): This act forced the resettlement of many thousands of American Indians because Andrew Jackson thought the most humane solution was to compel the American Indians to leave their traditional homelands and resettle west of the Mississippi.
Cherokee Nation v. Georgia (1831): This court case ruled that Cherokees were not a foreign nation with the right to sue in a federal court after the Cherokees challenged Georgia in the courts because they didn't want to migrate west.
Worcester v. Georgia (1832): This court case ruled that the laws of Georgia had no force within Cherokee territory. However, President Jackson sided with the states, and the Court was powerless to enforce its decision without the President's support.
Cherokee Trail of Tears: This was when the U.S. army forced 15,000 Cherokees to leave Georgia. The hardships westward caused the deaths of over 4,000 Cherokees.

Nicholas Biddle: This person was the president of the Bank of the United States. His arrogance contributed to the suspicion that the bank abused its powers and served the interests of only the wealthy. When Henry Clay tried to recharter the bank in 1832, Jackson vetoed it, and won the election in 1832 with it.
Roger Taney: This was the Secretary of Treasury under President Jackson, and aided Jackson with attacking the Bank of the United States.
"Pet banks": These were a series of state banks that stored the federal funds of the National Bank of America that President Jackson withdrew.
Specie Circular: This was a presidential order that required all future purchases of federal lands to be made in gold and silver rather than in paper banknotes.
Panic of 1837: After Specie Circular was enacted, paper banknotes lost their value and land sales plummeted. Right after Jackson left office, this financial crisis plunged the nation's economy into a depression.
Martin Van Buren: This person was the 8th president of the United States and was elected because President Jackson persuaded the Democratic party to nominate his loyal vice president.

Universal white male suffrage (1816-1856): This was adopted first by Indiana (1816), Illinois (1818), and Missouri (1821), and later by eastern states. As a result, voting for the president rose from 350,000 in 1824 to more than 2.4 million in 1840. In addition, political offices could be held by people in the lower and middle ranks of society. In 1856, all states had this.
"King Caucus": This is a nickname for when candidates for office were nominated by a closed-door meeting of a political party's leaders in Congress. Common citizens had no opportunity to participate
Anti-Masonic party: This was the first political party to gather in a large meeting hall to nominate the party's candidates, a method that was more open to popular participation, hence more democratic. This party attacked the secret societies of Masons and accused them of belonging to a privileged, anti democratic elite.
Spoils system: This is a practice of dispensing government jobs in return for party loyalty.
Rotation in office: This was a practice by President Jackson, in which he limited a person to one term in office, so he could then appoint some other deserving Democrat in his place.
John Quincy Adams: This person was the 6th president of the United States.
"Corrupt bargain": This name was created about a secret political deal between President John Quincy Adams and Henry Clay after Andrew Jackson found out that Henry Clay used his influence in the House to provide JQA the presidency and then JQA made Henry Clay his secretary of state.
Tariff of 1828; "Tariff of abominations": This tariff was signed by President JQA and generally satisfied the northern manufacturers but alienated southern planters. Southerners nicknamed it this.
Revolution of 1828: This was when Andrew Jackson's party resorted to smearing the president and accusing Adams' wife of being born out of wedlock. Supporters of Adams retaliated in kind, accusing Jackson's wife of adultery. The mudslinging campaign attracted a lot of interest and voter turnout soared. In the end, Jackson won the Election of 1828, carrying every state west of the Appalachians.
Andrew Jackson: This person was the 7th president of the United States and represented the "common man" (working and middle class). He was an extraordinary ordinary man.
Peggy Eaton affair (1829-1831): This was when the wife of Jackson's secretary of war was targeted by a malicious gossip by other cabinet wives. When Jackson tried to force the cabinet wives to accept the secretary of war's wife, most of the cabinet resigned. This controversy eventually led to John c. Calhoun resigning a year later, and Martin Van Buren being elected due to his loyalty during this crisis.
Nullification crisis (1832-1833): This was when John C. Calhoun declared the tariff of 1828 and the tariff of 1832 unconstitutional, saying that each state had the right to decide whether to obey a federal law or to declare it null and void. Calhoun held a special convention and passed a resolution forbidding the collection of tariffs within the state (South Carolina).
Webster-Hayne debate (1830): This was a debate between Robert Hayne of South Carolina and Daniel Webster of Massachusetts on the nature of the federal Union under the Constitution. Webster attacked the idea that any state could defy or leave the Union. President Jackson declared that "our federal Union, it must be preserved".
Force Bill (1833): This bill gave the President the power to raise an army and invade a state that was not following federal law.
Democrats: This party was formed after the Democratic-Republicans split. This party supported Andrew Jackson, and harked back to the old Republican party of Jefferson.
Whigs: This party was formed after the Democratic-Republicans split. This party support Henry Clay, and resembled the defunct Federalist party of Hamilton.
"Log cabin and hard cider"; "Tippecanoe and Tyler Too": These were two campaign slogans for President William Henry Harrison's election in 1840. One slogan played off his war hero status, and the other symbolized his humble origins.

~~Chapter 11: Society, Culture, and Reform, 1820-1860

Communal experiments: This was the idea of withdrawing from conventional society to create an ideal community, or utopia, in a fresh setting.
Shakers: This was one of the earliest religious communal movements, and had about 6,000 members in various communities by the 1840s. This society held property in common and kept women and men strictly separate (forbidding marriage and sexual relations). For lack of new recruits, this community virtually died out by the mid-1900s.
Amana Colonies: This was a communal experiment led by Germans who belonged to the religious reform movement known as Pietism. Like Shakers, they emphasized simple, communal living. However, they allowed for marriage, and their communities continue to prosper, although they no longer practice their communal ways of living.
Robert Owen; New Harmony: This person was the leader of this secular (nonreligious) experiment at this place. This person hoped his utopian socialist community would provide an answer to the problems of inequity and alienation caused by the Industrial Revolution. The experiment failed, however, as a result of both financial problems and disagreements among members of the community.
Joseph Henry Noyes; Oneida community (1848): This person started this cooperative community at this place. Dedicated to an ideal of perfect social and economic equality, community members shared property and, later, marriage partners. Critics attacked this community because of its system of planned reproduction and communal child-rearing as a sinful experiment in "free love."
Charles Fourier; Phalanxes: This person was a French socialist and attracted the interest of many Americans in this community. In response to the problems of a fiercely competitive society, this person advocated that people share work and housing in these communities. This movement died out quickly as Americans proved too individualistic to live communally.

Temperance: This movement was created because of the high rate of alcohol consumption (five gallons of hard liquor per person in 1820). It targeted alcohol as the cause of social ills, and explains why this became the most popular of the reform movements.
American Temperance Society (1826): This was founded by Protestant ministers and others concerned with drinking and its effects. It tried to persuade drinkers to take a pledge of total abstinence.
Washingtonians: This was formed when a group of recovering alcoholics argued that alcoholism was a disease that needed practical, helpful treatment.
Asylum movement: This was a movement created to help the increasing numbers of criminals, emotionally disturbed persons, and paupers. To alleviate the suffering of these individuals, reformers proposed setting up new public institutions -- state supported prisons, mental hospitals, and poorhouses. Reformers hoped that inmates would be cured as a result of being withdrawn from squalid surroundings and treated to a disciplined pattern of life in some rural setting.
Dorothea Dix: This person was a former schoolteacher from Massachusetts and was horrified to find mentally ill persons locked up with convicted criminals in unsanitary cells. She launched a cross-country crusade, publicizing the awful treatment she had witnessed. In the 1840s one state legislature after another built new mental hospitals or improved existing institutions and mental patients began receiving professional treatment
Thomas Gallaudet; Samuel Gridley Howe: These two other reformers founded special institutions to help people with physical disabilities. The first one opened a school for the deaf, and the second one started a school for the blind. By the 1850s, special schools modeled after the work of these reformers had been established in many states of the Union.
Penitentiaries: These were new prisons to take the place of crude jails. Reformers placed prisoners in solitary confinement to force them to reflect on their sins and repent. The experiment was dropped because of the high rate of prisoner suicides. These prison reforms reflected a major doctrine of the asylum movement - structure and discipline would bring about moral reform.
Auburn system: This was a penal experiment in New York that enforced rigid rules of discipline while also providing moral instruction and work programs.
Horace Mann: This person was the leading advocate of the common (public) school movement. As secretary of the newly founded Massachusetts Board of Education, this person worked for compulsory attendance for all children, a longer school year, and increased teacher preparation. In the 1840s, the movement for public schools spread rapidly to other states.
William Holmes McGuffey; McGuffey readers: This person was a Pennsylvanian teacher who created a series of elementary textbooks that became widely used to teach reading and morality. These textbooks extolled the virtues of hard work, punctuality, and sobriety -- thi kind of behaviors needed in an emerging industrial society.

American Peace Society (1828, 1846-1848): This society was founded with the objective of abolishing war, and actively protested the war with Mexico.

American Colonization Society (1817-1822): This society was founded with the idea of transporting freed slaves to an African colony. This appealed to moderate anti slavery reformers and politicians, in part because whites with racist attitudes hoped to remove free blacks from U.S. society. This society also established an African-American settlement in Monrovia, Liberia.
William Lloyd Garrison; The Liberator; American Anti-Slavery Society (1833): This person began publication of this abolitionist newspaper, an event that marks the beginning of the radical abolitionist movement. This person advocated immediate abolition of slavery in every state and territory without compensating the slave owners. This person and other abolitionists formed this society. In addition, Garrison stepped up his attacks by condemning and burning the Constitution as a pro slavery document. He argued for "no Union with slaveholders" until they repented for their sins by freeing their slaves.
Liberty party (1840): This party was split off of the American Anti-slavery Society because they thought William Lloyd Garrison was too radical. A group of northerners formed this party because they thought political action was a more practical route to reform than Garrison's moral crusade. They ran James birney as their candidate for president with their one campaign pledge being to bring about the end of slavery by political and legal means.
Frederick Douglass; The North Star: This person was a former slave and spoke about the brutality and degradation of slavery from firsthand experience. He wrote this journal, and advocated both political and direct action to end slavery and racial prejudice.
Harriet Tubman; David Ruggles; Sojourner Truth; William Still: These four people helped organize the effort (Underground Railroad) to assist fugitive slaves escape to free territory in the North or to Canada, where slavery was prohibited.
David Walker; Henry Highland Garnet: These were two northern African Americans who advocated the most radical solution to the slavery question. They argued that slaves should take action themselves by rising up in revolt against their owners.

Antebellum: This is the name of the period before the civil war.
Romanticism: This movement was a shift away from Enlightenment emphasis on balance, order, and reason and a focus towards intuition, feeling, individual acts of heroism, and the study of nature. This movement was expressed in the United States by transcendentalists, a small group of New England thinkers.
Transcendentalists: This group of people questioned the doctrines of established churches and the business practices of the merchant class. They argued for a mystical and intuitive way of thinking as a means for discovering one's inner self and looking for the essence of God in nature. Their views challenged the materialism of American society by suggesting that artistic expression was more important than the pursuit of wealth.
Ralph Waldo Emerson: This person was the best-known transcendentalist and was a very popular American speaker. His essays and lectures expressed the individualistic and nationalistic spirit of Americans by urging them not to imitate European culture but to create a distinctive American culture. He argued for self-reliance, independent thinking, and the primacy of spiritual matters over material ones. He would become a leading critic of slavery in the 1850s and then an ardent supporter of the Union during the civil war.
Henry David Thoreau, "On Civil Disobedience": This person was a transcendentalist who conducted a two-year experiment of living simply in a cabin in the woods outside of town. He used observations of nature to discover essential truths about life and the universe. He wrote this essay, where he established himself as an early advocate of nonviolent protest. His essay presented his argument for disobeying unjust laws and accepting the penalty. He followed through with his beliefs when he refused to pay a tax that would support an action he considered immoral - the U.S. war with Mexico (1846-1848). He would eventually inspire nonviolent movements such as Gandhi in India and Martin Luther King Jr. in the United States.
Brook Farm; George Ripley(1841-1849): This was a communal experiment led by this person, a Protestant minister. His goal was to achieve "a more natural union between intellectual and manual labor." A bad fire and heavy debts eventually forced this experiment to end.
Margaret Fuller: This person was a feminist (advocate of women's rights) writer and editor in the Antebellum Period.
Theodore Parker: This person was a theologian and radical reformer in the Antebellum Period.
George Caleb Bingham: This artist specialized in Genre painting and depicted common people in various settings and carrying out domestic chores.
William S. Mount: This artist specialized in Genre painting and won popularity for his lively rural compositions.
Thomas Cole; Frederick Church: These two artists emphasized the heroic beauty of American landscapes, especially in dramatic scenes along the Hudson River in New York State and the western frontier wilderness
Hudson River school: This was a school that expressed the romantic age's fascination with the natural world.
Washington Irving; James Fenimore Cooper: These two authors wrote fiction using American settings. The first of these authors wrote Rip Van Winkle(1819) and The Legend of Sleepy Hollow(1820) The second of these authors wrote Leatherstocking Tales(1823-1841), a series of novels written from 1824 to 1841 that glorified the frontiersman as nature's nobleman.
Nathaniel Hawthorne: This person was a novelist in the Antebellum Period. He questioned the intolerance and conformity in American life in his novel The Scarlet Letter (1850).
Herman Melville: This person was a novelist in the Antebellum Period that wrote the innovative novel Moby-Dick (1855), which reflected the theological and cultural conflicts of the era.
Sylvester Graham: This person supported dietary reforms, such as eating whole wheat bread, his crackers, to promote good digestion.
Amelia Bloomer: This person supported dress reform for women. She wanted to get women to wear pantalettes instead of long skirts.

Second Great Awakening: This was the second religious revival during the early decades of the 19th century. This was partly a reaction against the rationalism (belief in human reason) that had been the fashion during the Enlightenment and the American Revolution. It caused new divisions in society between the newer, evangelical sects and the older Protestant churches.
Timothy Dwight: This person was the president of Yale College in Connecticut, and motivated a generation of young men to become evangelical preachers. He was one of the people who started the Second Great Awakening
Revivalism; Charles Finney: This person started this promotion of religious fervor in upstate New York. Instead of delivering sermons based on rational argument, this person appealed to people's emotions and fear of damnation. He preached that every individual could be saved through faith and hard work--ideas that strongly appealed to the rising middle class. Because of his influence, western New York became known as the "burned-over district".
Millennialism; William Miller: This was the belief that the world was about to end with the second coming of Jesus. This person gained tens of thousands of followers by predicting a specific date (October 21, 1844) for the second coming. Nothing happened, but his group continued as a new Christian denomination, the Seventh-Day Adventists.
Church of Latter-Day Saints (Mormons); Joseph Smith; Brigham Young; New Zion: This was a religious group that was founded by this person in 1830. This person based his religious thinking on a book of Scripture -- the Book of Mormon -- which traced a connection between the American Indians and the lost tribes of Israel. He gathered a following, but was eventually killed by a local mob and replaced by this other person, who led this religious group to the far western frontier, where they established this (as they called their religious community) on the banks of the Great Salt Lake in Utah.

Cult of domesticity: This is the idealized view of women as moral leaders in the home, saying women must take charge of the household and children.
Sarah Grimke; Angelina Grimke: These two sisters objected to male opposition to their anti slavery activities. In protest, the first of the sisters wrote her Letter on the Condition of Women and the Equality of the Sexes (1837)
Lucretia Mott; Elizabeth Cady Stanton: These two reformers began campaigning for women's rights after they had been barred from speaking at an anti slavery convention.
Seneca Falls Convention (1848): This was a meeting with all of the leading feminists in New York. They concluded with their document that was closely modeled after the Declaration of independence -- "Declaration of Sentiments", which declared that "all men and women are created equal" and listed women's grievances against laws and customs that discriminated against them.
Elizabeth Cady Stanton; Susan B. Anthony: These two women led the campaign for equal voting, legal, and property rights for women after the Seneca Falls Convention (1848). However, the issue of women's rights was overshadowed by the crisis over slavery.

~Period 5: 1848-1877

~~Chapter 12: Territorial and Economic Expansion, 1830-1860

Manifest Destiny: This was the popular belief that the United States had a divine mission to extend its power and civilization across the breadth of North America.
Elias Howe: This person invented the sewing machine, which took much of the production of clothing out of homes into factories.
Samuel F. B. Morse (1844): This person invented an electric telegraph, which went hand in hand with the growth of railroads in enormously speeding up communication and transportation across the country.
Panic of 1857: This was a financial panic where prices, especially for Midwestern farmers, dropped sharply, and unemployment in Northern cities increased. Since cotton prices remained high, the South was less affected. As a result, some Southerners believed that their plantation economy was superior and that continued union with the Northern economy was not needed.

Great American Desert: This is the arid area between the Mississippi Valley and the Pacific Coast.
Mountain men (1820s): These were fur traders and were the earliest non-native individuals to open the Far West. They held yearly rendezvous in the Rockies with American Indians to trade for animal skins.
Overland trails: These were long and arduous treks that usually began in St. Joseph or Independence, Missouri, or in Council Bluffs, Iowa, and followed the river valleys through the Great Plains. Inching along at only 15 miles a day, a wagon train needed months to finally reach the foothills of the Rockies or face the hardships of the southwestern deserts. The final life-or-death challenge was to get through the mountain passes of the Sierras and Cascades before the first heavy snow.
Gold rush; Silver rush: These were mass migrations to mineral-rich mountains of the West. These occurred in Colorado, Nevada, the Black Hills of the Dakotas, and other western territories.

John Tyler (1841-1845): This person was the 10th president, and was the first vice-president to succeed the presidency. He vetoed the Whigs' national bank bills and other legislation, and favored southern expansionist Democrats during the balance of his term.
"Fifty-four Forty or Fight!": This was the democratic slogan in the Election of 1844. It referred to the line of latitude that marked the northern border between the Oregon Territory and Russian Alaska.
James K. Polk: This person was the 11th president, and was a dark horse (lesser known candidate). He had been a protege of Andrew Jackson and favored the annexation of Texas, the "reoccupation" of all of Oregon, and the acquisition of California.
Wilmot Proviso: This was a bill that forbade slavery in any of the new territories acquired from Mexico from the Mexican War. It passed in the house twice, but was defeated in the Senate.
Franklin Pierce: This person was the 12th president and adopted pro-southern policies.
Ostend Manifesto (1852): This was a secret negotiation headed by President Pierce to purchase Cuba from Spain. However, this incident was leaked to the press and provoked an angry reaction from antislavery members of Congress and forced President Pierce to drop the scheme.

Stephen Austin: This person succeeded in bringing 300 families into Texas and thereby beginning a steady migration of America settlers into the vast frontier territory.
Antonio Lopez de Santa Anna: This was a general that made himself dictator of Mexico and abolished that nation's federal system of government. He tried to enforce Mexico's laws to outlaw slavery and require all immigrants convert to Roman Catholicism.
Sam Houston (Independence 1836): This person led American settlers to revolt in Texas and declare Texas to be an independent republic.
Alamo; "Remember the Alamo": This was a place in the Texas Revolution where General Santa Anna killed every one of its American defenders. This would eventually be used as a symbol/saying to keep fighting in Texas.
Battle of San Jacinto River: This was a battle where an army under Sam Houston caught the Mexicans by surprise and captured their general, Santa Anna. Under the threat of death, Santa Anna was forced to sign a treaty that recognized independence for Texas and granted the new republic all territory north of the Rio Grande.
Aroostook War: This was a war between Maine and the Canadian province of New Brunswick. It was a boundary dispute between lumbermen on the Maine-Canadian border and had erupted into fighting.
Webster-Ashburton Treaty (1842): This treaty resolved the Aroostook War, and split the disputed territory between Maine and British Canada. It also settled the boundary of the Minnesota territory, leaving what proved to be the iron-rich Mesabi range on the U.S. side of the border.
Rio Grande; Nueces River: These were the two places where the Texas-Mexico boundary dispute occurred. Texas insisted that its southern boundary was this, while Spain insisted that Texas' southern boundary was this respectively.
Mexican War (1846-1847): This was a war between Mexico and the U.S. that started when a Mexican army crossed the Rio Grande and captured an American army patrol, killing 11.
Zachary Taylor (1847): This person led a force of 6,000 men in the Mexican War and drove the Mexican army from Texas, crossed the Rio Grande into northern Mexico, and won a major victory at Buena Vista. He would also become the 12th president
Stephen Kearney (1846): This person was a general in the Mexican War and succeeded in taking Santa Fe, the New Mexico territory, and southern California.
Winfield Scott (1847): This general invaded central Mexico with an army of 14,000 and succeeded in taking the coastal city of Vera Cruz and then captured Mexico City.
California; Bear Flag Republic (1846): This independent republic was formed when John C. Fremont overthrew Mexican rule at this place during the Mexican War.
Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo (1848): Negotiated by American diplomat Nicholas Trist, this treaty provided the following - (1) Mexico recognized the Rio Grande as the southern border of Texas and (2) The United States took control of California and New Mexico -- The Mexican Cession. U.S. paid $15 million for these territories and assumed responsibility for any claims of American citizens against Mexico.
Walker Expedition (1853 - 1855 - 1860): This was when Southern adventurer William Walker had tried unsuccessfully to take Baja California from Mexico. After his failure, he led a force of mostly Southerners and took over Nicaragua. His regime temporarily gained recognition from the United States, but his mini empire collapsed when a coalition of Central American countries invaded and defeated him, leading to his execution by Honduran authorities.
Clayton-Bulwer Treaty (1850): This treaty provided that neither U.S. nor Britain would attempt to take exclusive control of any future canal route in Central America.
Gadsden Purchase (1853): This was a purchase by President Pierce that succeeded in adding a strip of land to the American Southwest for a railroad. Mexico agreed to sell thousands of acres of semi-desert land to the United States for $10 million. This land forms the southern sections of present-day New Mexico and Arizona.
Matthew C. Perry; Kanagawa Treaty (1854): This person was sent with a small fleet of naval ships to Japan, which had been closed to most foreigners for over two centuries. He pressured Japan's government to sign this treaty, which allowed U.S. vessels to enter two Japanese ports to take on coal. This treaty lead to a commercial agreement on trade.


~Period 7: 1890-1945
~~Chapter 21: The Progressive Era (1901-1917)

Progressivism: This is using the federal government as an agent of change to fix social, political, and economic ills. More specifically, they wanted to limit the power of big business, improve democracy for the people, and strengthen social justice.
Pragmatism : This is the belief that "good" and "true" could not be known in the abstract as fixed and changeless ideals. Rather, they said, people should take a practical, approach to morals, ideals, and knowledge. It was founded by William James and John Dewey because of Darwin's book, *Origin of Species*.
Frederick W. Taylor : This person used a stopwatch to time the output of factory workers, and discovered the scientific management system.
Scientific management : This is the term for organizing people in the most efficient manner.

Muckraking: These were in-depth, investigative stories that exposed the scandalous realities of politics, factories, and slums.
*Wealth against Commonwealth* (1894): This book, written by muckraker Henry Demarest Lloyd, fully exposed the corruption and greed of the oil monopoly but failed to suggest how to control it.
*Tweed Days in St. Louis (1902); Shame of the Cities (1904)*: These were a series of muckraking articles about Boss Tweed, and a book, which caused a sensation by describing in detail the corrupt deals that characterized big-city politics from Philadelphia to Minneapolis written by Lincoln Steffens.
*The History of the Standard Oil Company (1904)*: This book was written by Ida Tarbell and exposed the aggressive pricing of the monopolistic Standard Oil Company
*How the Other Half Lives (1890)*: This book was written by Jacob Riis, and was about tenement life, describing squalid living conditions in New York City slums in the 1880s.
*The Financier (1912); The Titan (1914)*:Theodore Dreiser wrote these two novels that portrayed the avarice and ruthlessness of an industrialist.

Australian/Secret ballot (1888): This was created when Massachusetts issued ballots printed by the state and required voters to mark their choices secretly within a private booth.
Direct primary (1903): This was a new system, introduced by Robert La Follette, for bypassing politicians and placing the nominating process directly in the hands of the voters. The system's effectiveness in overthrowing boss rule was limited, as politicians devised ways of confusing the voters and splitting the anti machine vote.
17th Amendment (1913): This amendment required all U.S. senators to be elected by popular vote.
Initiative: This is a method by which voters could compel the legislature to consider a bill.
Referendum: This is a method that allowed citizens to vote on proposed laws printed on their ballots
Recall: This enabled voters to remove a corrupt or unsatisfactory politician from office by majority vote before that official's term had expired.

Municipal reform (1890s-1900s): These were changes in city governments made to encourage greater efficiency, honesty, and responsiveness. It was introduced by Samuel M. "Golden Rule" Jones.
Tom L. Johnson : This person devoted himself to tax reform and three-cent trolley fares for the people of Cleveland. He was Cleveland's mayor from 1901-1909, and fought hard -- but without success -- for public ownership and operation of the city's public utilities and services (water, electricity, and trolleys).
Commission plan (1900): This is a plan where voters elected the heads of city departments (fire, police, and sanitation), not just the mayor.
City manager plan (1913) : This plan was more effective than the commission plan - First tried in Dayton, Ohio, where an expert manager was hired by an elected city council to direct the work of the various departments of city government. By 1923, more than 300 cities had adopted the manager-council plan of municipal government.
"Wisconsin Idea" : This plan, established by Robert La Follette, was a series of Progressive measures that included a direct primary law, tax reform, and state regulatory commissions to monitor railroads, utilities, and business such as insurance.

National Child Labor Committee (1904): This committee's mission was promoting the rights, awareness, dignity, wellbeing and education of children and youth as they relate to work and working. They proposed model state child labor laws that were passed by two-thirds of the states.
Florence Kelley : This person promoted the passage of state laws to protect women from long working hours.
National Consumers' League (1899) : This program is an American consumer organization that represented consumers on marketplace and workplace issues.
Lochner v. New York (1905): This court case that ruled against a state law limiting workers to a ten-hour workday.
Muller v. Oregon (1908): This court case that ruled that health of women needed special protection from long hours.
Triangle Shirtwaist fire (1911): This was when, in New York city, a high-rise garment factory fire took 146 lives, mostly women. This sparked greater women's activism and motivated states to pass laws to improve safety and working conditions in factories. One unforeseen consequence of efforts to protect women in the workplace was that legislation kept women out of physically demanding but higher paying jobs in industry and mining.

Anthracite coal miners' strike (1902): This strike involved miners who wanted higher wages, shorter work days, and recognition of their union.
Square Deal (1901): This was when Theodore Roosevelt tried to mediate the Anthracite Coal Miners' Strike through this process, which called a union leader and coal mine owners to the White House.
Bad vs. good trusts : These trusts had to be destroyed because they harmed the public and stifled competition, and these other trusts had to be regulated because with efficiency and low prices they dominated the market.
Elkins Act (1903): This act created the Interstate Commerce Commission (ICC) and gave it the authority to stop railroads from granting rebates to favored customers.
Hepburn Act (1906): This act gave the Interstate Commerce Commission (ICC) power to fix "just and reasonable" rates for railroads.
The Jungle: This book was written by muckraker Upton Sinclair, whs described in horrifying detail the conditions in the Chicago stockyards and meatpacking industry.
Pure Food and Drug Act (1906): This act forbade the manufacture, sale, and transportation of adulterated or mislabeled foods and drugs.
Meat Inspection Act (1906): This act provided that federal inspectors visit meatpacking plants to ensure that they met minimum standards of sanitation.
Forest Reserve Act (1891): This act was used by Theodore Roosevelt to set federal land as a national reserve that could not be sold to private interests.
Newlands Reclamation Act (1902): This is the law that provided money from the sale of public land for irrigation projects in western states.
White House Conference of Governors (1908): This was a conversation that promoted coordinated conservation planning by federal and state governments
Gifford Pinchot : This person was a Pennsylvanian that created the National Conservation Commission. He was the first director of the U.S. Forest Service.

Mann-Elkins Act (1910): This act gave the Interstate Commerce Commission (ICC) the power to suspend new railroad rates and oversee telephone, telegraph, and cable companies.
16th Amendment (1913): This authorized the U.S. government to collect an income tax, which at first, applied only to the very wealthy.
Payne-Aldrich Tariff (1909): This raised the tariff on most imports. This angered the Progressives because Taft had promised to lower the tariff.

Socialist Party of America (1897) (Changed name in 1901): This party's platform called for more radical reforms than the Progressives favored - public ownership of the railroads, utilities, and even of major industries such as oil and steel.
Eugene V. Debs : This person was one of the Socialist party's founders, and was the party's candidate for president in five elections from 1900 to 1920. He was a former railway union leader, and adopted socialism while jailed for the Pullman strike.
Bull Moose party (1912): This party was formed by Progressive Republicans and nominated Theodore Roosevelt.
New Nationalism (1910): This was Theodore Roosevelt's platform that called for more government regulation of business and unions, women's suffrage, and more social welfare programs.
New Freedom (1912): This was Woodrow Wilson's platform that would limit both big business and big government, bring about reform by ending corruption, and revive competition by supporting small businesses.

Underwood Tariff (1913): This tariff substantially lowered tariffs for the first time in over 50 years. To compensate for the reduced tariff revenues, it also included a graduated income tax with rates from 1% to 6%.
Federal Reserve Act; Federal Reserve Board (1914): This act created this board, which supervised 12 district banks around America, and forced Americans to use Federal Reserve Notes (dollar bills), which were issued by the federally regulated banking system.
Clayton Antitrust Act (1914): This act strengthened the provisions in the Sherman Antitrust Act for breaking up monopolies. Most important for organized labor, the new law contained a clause exempting unions from being prosecuted as trusts.
Federal Trade Commission Act; Federal Trade Commission (1914): This act created a new regulatory agency that was empowered to investigate and take action against any "unfair trade practice" in every industry except banking and transportation.
Federal Farm Loan Act (1916): This act created 12 regional federal farm loan banks were established to provide farm loans at low interest rates
Child Labor Act (1916): This act was passed and prohibited the shipment in interstate commerce of products manufactured by children under 14 years old. The Supreme Court found this act to be unconstitutional in the 1918 case of Hammer v. Dagenhart.

Plessy v. Ferguson (1896): This was the court case that said "separate but equal" / racial segregation was okay.
Booker T. Washington : In this person's Atlanta Exposition speech in 1895, he argued that blacks' needs for education and economic progress were of foremost importance, and that they should concentrate on learning industrial skills for better wages. Only after establishing a secure economic base, could African Americans hope to realize their other goal of political and social equality.
W. E. B. Du Bois; The Souls of Black Folk : This person wrote this book, and criticized Booker T. Washington's approach and demanded equal rights for African Americans. He argued that political and social rights were a prerequisite for economic independence.
Niagara Movement (1905): This group was formed by W. E. B. Du Bois after he met with a group of black intellectuals in Niagara Falls, Canada, to discuss a programs of protest and action aimed at securing equal rights for blacks.
National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP) (1908): This organization was created when Du Bois, members of the Niagara Movement, and a group of white Progressives founded this organization. Its mission was to abolish all forms of segregation and to increase educational opportunities for African American children.
National Urban League (1911): This organization wanted to help people migrating from the south to northern cities. Their motto was "Not Alms But Opportunity", which reflected its emphasis on self-reliance and economic advancement.

National American Woman Suffrage Association (NAWSA) (1890) : This association argued for the vote as a broadening of democracy which would empower women, thus enabling them to more actively care for their families in an industrial society. It's leader in 1900 was Carrie Chapman Catt.
Alice Paul : This person was from New Jersey, and broke off from the National American Woman Suffrage Association (NAWSA) to form the National Woman's party.
National Women's party (1916) : This party focused on winning the support of Congress and the president for an amendment to the Constitution.
19th Amendment (1920) : Guaranteed the women's right to vote in all elections at the local, state, and national levels.
League of Women Voters (1920) : This was a civic organization dedicated to keeping voters informed about candidates and issues.
Planned Parenthood organization (1916): This organization, created by Margaret Sanger, advocated for birth-control education, especially among the poor. Women made progress in securing educational equality, liberalizing marriage and divorce laws, reducing discrimination in business and professions, and recognizing women's rights to own property.

~~Chapter 22: World War I and Its Aftermath, 1914-1920

Allied Power: This was a group of countries consisting of France, Great Britain, Russia, and later Italy and U.S.
Central Powers: This was a group of countries consisting of Austria-Hungary, Germany, Italy, and the Ottoman Empire.
Submarine warfare (1915): This is when Germany answered the British blockade by announcing a blockade of its own and warned that ships attempting to enter the "war zone" (waters near the British Isles) risked being sunk on sight by German submarines.
Lusitania (1915): This British passenger liner was hit by German torpedoes and sank. Most of the passengers drowned, including 128 Americans. Wilson reacted with a strongly worded diplomatic message warning that Germany would be held to "strict accountability" if it continued its policy of sinking unarmed ships.
Sussex; Sussex pledge (1916): After Germany struck this ship, Germany made this pledge to promise not to sink merchant or passenger ships without giving due warning.
Kaiser Wilhelm: This German general was portrayed by propaganda as a mean-spirited autocrat, and Germany was portrayed a cruel bully.

Preparedness: This is an ambitious expansion of armed forces
Jeannette Rankin: This person was the first woman to be elected to Congress
Edward House: This person was the chief foreign policy adviser of Wilson in 1915. He was sent to London, Paris, and Berlin to negotiate a peace settlement, but failed.
Zimmerman telegram (1917): This was a secret offer from Germany to Mexico. It was intercepted by British intelligence, and the offer proposed that Mexico ally itself with Germany in return for Germany's pledge to help Mexico ally itself with Germany in return for Germany's pledge to help Mexico recover lost territories.
Russian revolution (1917): This was when the czar's government was overthrown and Russia became a republic. Later in November the government would be taken by Communists.

Liberty Bonds: This bond is when the federal government sells IOU's / bonds for money, but that bond can not be cashed in within a certain amount of time

George Creel; Committee on Public Information (1917): This person was in charge of this program, which enlisted the voluntary services of artists, writers, vaudeville performers, and movie stars to depict the heroism of the U.S. soldiers and the villainy of the kaiser. They created films, posters, pamphlets, and volunteer speakers -- all urging Americans to watch out for German spies and to "do your bit" for the war (WWI).
Espionage Act (1917): This act provided for imprisonment of up to 20 years for persons who either tried to incite rebellion in the armed forces or obstruct the operation of the draft.
Sedition Act (1918): This act prohibited anyone from making "disloyal" or "abusive" remarks about the U.S. government.
Schenck v. United States (1919): This court case upheld the constitutionality of the Espionage Act in a case involving a man who had been imprisoned for distributing pamphlets against the draft. Concluded that the right to free speech could be limited when it represented a "clear and present" danger to the public safety.
Selective Service Act (1917): This act devised a system to conscript men into the military. The government required all men between 21 and 30 (and later 18 and 45) to register for possible induction into the military.

The Great Migration (1910-1930): This is when about a million African Americans traveled north to seek jobs in the cities.

Bolshevik Revolution (effect) (1917): This caused Russia to withdraw from WWI.

Fourteen Points (1918): This was a statement of principles for peace that was to be used for peace negotiations in order to end World War I. It included causes of WWI and America's entry, redrawing borders on the basis of *self-determination, and the League of Nations
Big Four: These people were known as this - David Lloyd George of Great Britain, Georges Clemenceau of France, and Vittorio Orlando of Italy all wanted revenge against germany and compensation in the form of indemnities and territory.
Treaty of Versailles (1919): This treaty wanted <1>. Germany to be disarmed and stripped of its colonies, admit guilt for the war, accept French occupation of the Rhineland for 15 years, and pay a huge sum of money in reparations to Great Britain and France. <2>. Territories once controlled by Germany, Austria-Hungary, and Russia were to be taken by the Allies. Independence was granted to Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, Finland, and Poland, and the new nations of Czechoslovakia and Yugoslavia were established. <3>. Signers of the treaty would join an international organization, the League of Nations.
League of Nations (1920): This league called on each member nation to stand ready to protect the independence and territorial integrity of other nations. It was created by Article X.

Irreconcilables: This group could not accept U.S. membership in the League, no matter how the covenant was worded. They included George Norris, William Borah, Robert La Follette, and Hiram Johnson.
Reservationists: This group said they could accept the League if certain reservations were added to the covenant (keep Congress' ability to declare war). Its main leader was Henry Cabot Lodge.

Red Scare (1919): This was when the country suffered from a volatile combination of unhappiness with the peace process, fears of communism fueled by the Communist takeover in Russia, and worries about labor unrest at home. This is the anti-Communist hysteria.
Palmer raids (1919-1920): These were a series of unexplained bombings caused Attorney General A. Mitchell Palmer to establish a special office under J. Edgar Hoover to gather information on radicals. Over 6,000 people were arrested, based on limited criminal evidence.
Xenophobia: This is intense or irrational dislike or fear of people from other countries.
Boston police strike (1919): This is when police went on strike to protest the firing of a few police officers that tried to unionize. Massachusetts Governor Calvin Coolidge sent in the National Guard to break this strike.
Race riots (Late 1910s-1920s): This was when the migration of African Americans to northern cities during the war increased racial tensions. These occurred because whites resented the increased competition for jobs and housing.

~~Chapter 23: The Modern Era of the 1920s, "Roaring Twenties"

Warren Harding (1920-1924): This person was the 29th president and ran for the election of 1920 and was unclear about where he stood on every issue. He said that the American people wanted a "return to normalcy."
Albert Fall: This person was the secretary of the Interior under Warren Harding, known for political corruption such as accepting bribes for granting oil leases near Teapot Dome, Wyoming. He also took bribes for agreeing not to prosecute certain criminal suspects.
Fordney-McCumber Tariff Act (1922): This act increased tariff rates by 25 percent. It was protective of U.S. business interests in the short run, but destructive in the long run.
Bureau of the Budget (1921): This Bureau made procedures for all government expenditures to be placed in a single budget for Congress to review and vote on.
Calvin Coolidge (1924-1928): This person was the 30th president and was vice president and successor of Warren Harding; he won popularity in 1919 as the Massachusetts governor who broke the Boston police strike. "If you don't say anything, you won't be called on to repeat it." He was elected in the election of 1924 and served only one term.
Herbert Hoover (1928-1932): This person was the 31st president, the secretary of commerce under Warren Harding and a candidate for the Republican party and winner in the Election of 1928.

Supply Side Economics: In this economic theory, the ideal flow of action is (1). Cut taxes (2). Invest or spend (in capital) (3). Employment (4). Consumer spending
Assembly line (1914): This process was created by Henry Ford and involves workers remaining at one place all day and performing the same simple operation over and over again at rapid speed, instead of losing time moving around a factory. This increased worker productivity.
Open shop: This is a policy that keeps jobs open to non-union workers.
Welfare capitalism: This is when a company voluntarily offers their employees improved benefits and higher wages in order to reduce their interest in organizing unions.
Consumerism: This is the protection or promotion of the interests of consumers.

Flappers: "new breed" of young Western women in the 1920s who wore short skirts, bobbed their hair, listened to jazz, and flaunted their disdain for what was then considered acceptable behavior
Sigmund Freud: This person was an Austrian psychiatrist who stressed the role of sexual repression in mental illness.
Only Yesterday (1931): This book chronicled American life in the 1920s. It was written by Frederick Lewis Allen, an editor of Harper's Magazine and also notable as an American historian of the first half of the twentieth century.

Lost Generation (1920s): These were writers, perpetrated by money interests, that scorned religion as hypocritical and bitterly condemned the sacrifices of war-time as a fraud.
Art Deco(1920s-1930s): This is the predominant decorative art style of the 1920s and 1930s, characterized by precise and boldly delineated geometric shapes and strong colors, and used most notably in household objects and in architecture.

Harlem Renaissance (1920s-1930s): This was a cultural, social, and artistic explosion that took place in Harlem, New York.  The Movement also included the new African-American cultural expressions across the urban areas in the Northeast and Midwest United States affected by the African-American Great Migration. Also known as the "New Negro Movement".
Back to Africa movement (1920s): This was a movement that encouraged those of African descent to return to the African homelands of their ancestors. It was led by Marcus Garvey, a charismatic immigrant who advocated individual and racial pride for African Americans and developed political ideas of black nationalism.

Modernism: This belief involves taking a historical and critical view of certain passages in the Bible and believing they could accept Darwin's theory of evolution without abandoning their religious faith.
Fundamentalism: This belief involves teaching that every word in the Bible must be accepted as literally true
Revivalists: These people preached a fundamentalist message, but did so for the first time making full use of the new tool of mass communication.
Billy Sunday, Aimee Semple McPherson: These were two evangelists, one of which drew large crowds as he attacked drinking, gambling, and dancing, and the other condemned the twin evils of communism and jazz music from her pulpit in Los Angeles.
Scopes trial (1925): This court case debated whether it is legal to teach the theory of evolution in Tennessee. They declared that teaching evolution was not allowed.
Adkins v. Children's Hospital (1923): This is the court case that reversed Muller v. Oregon.
Volstead Act (1919); 18th Amendment: This act was created to carry out the intent of the 18th amendment, which established prohibition.
Al Capone: This a person was a leader of a chicago gang and fought for control of the lucrative bootlegging trade.

Quota laws (1921) (1924): These were two laws that severely limited immigration based on nationality. The first one limited immigration to 3 percent of the number of foreign-born persons from a given nation counted in the 1910 Census. The second act limited immigration to 2 percent based on the Census of 1890.
Sacco and Vanzetti case (1920-1927): This case was when two people were convicted in a Massachusetts court of committing robbery and murder. Liberals protested that these two men were innocent, and that they had been accused, convicted, and sentenced to die simply because they were poor Italians and anarchists. This resulted in these two men being executed.
Ku Klux Klan (1915-1944) : This new party focused on nativism and used modern advertising techniques to grow to 5 million members. They drew most of their support from lower-middle-class white Protestants in small cities and towns. They terrorized and intimidated anyone targeted as "un-American".
Birth of a Nation (1919): This movie portrayed the KKK during Reconstruction as the heroes, and from the white backlash to the race riots.

Washington Naval Conference (1921): This was done by Secretary of State Charles Evan Hughes to talk about naval disarmament, where he hoped to stabilize the size of the U.S. Navy relative to that of other powers and to resolve conflicts in the Pacific.
Five-Power Treaty (1922): This is the act where nations with the five largest navies agreed to maintain the following ratio with respect to their largest warships, or battleships - U.S., 5; Britain, 5; Japan, 3; France, 1.67; Italy, 1.67. U.S. and Britain also agreed not to fortify their possessions in the Pacific, while no limit was placed on the Japanese.
Four-Power Treaty (1921): This act is where the U.S., France, Great Britain, and Japan agreed to respect one another's territory in the Pacific.
Nine-Power Treaty (1922): This act is where all nine nations at a specific conference agreed to respect the Open Door policy by guaranteeing the territorial integrity of China.
Kellogg-Briand Pact (1928): This agreement, signed by almost all nations of the world, renounced the aggressive use of force to achieve national ends. This international agreement would prove ineffective, because it permitted defensive wars and failed to provide for taking action against violators of the agreement.
Dawes Plan (1924): This was a compromise that established a cycle of payments flowing from the United States to Germany and from Germany to the Allies. U.S. banks would lend Germany huge sums to rebuild its economy and pay reparations to Britain and France. In turn, Britain and France would use the reparations money to pay their war debts to the United States. This cycle helped to ease financial problems on both sides of the Atlantic

~~Chapter 24: The Great Depression and the New Deal, 1929-1939

Black Tuesday (1929): 5 days before October 29, there was an unprecedented volume of selling on Wall Street, and stock prices plunged. The next day, hoping to stave off disaster by stabilizing prices, a group of bankers bought millions of dollars of stocks. The strategy worked for only one business day, Friday. The selling frenzy resumed on Monday. On this day, the bottom fell out, as millions of panicky investors ordered their brokers to sell, but almost no buyers could be found. From that day on, prices on Wall Street kept going down and down.
Buying on margin: This allowed people to borrow most of the cost of the stock, making down payments as low as 10%.

Gross Domestic Product: This is the total value of all goods and services produced within a nations borders during a specific time period.
Gross National Product: This is the total value of all goods and services produced by a nation in one year during a specific time period.

Hawley-Smoot Tariff (1930): This is when Herbert Hoover signed the highest peacetime tariff in history at 49% on foreign imports.
Debt Moratorium (1931): This is when Herbert Hoover proposed a suspension on the payment of international debts. Britain and Germany readily accepted, but France balked.
Federal Farm Board (1929): This was given more power during the Great Depression, and was authorized to help farmers stabilize prices by temporarily holding surplus grain and cotton in storage. The program, however, was far too modest to handle the continued overproduction of farm goods.
Reconstruction Finance Corporation (1932): This was created as a measure for propping up faltering railroads, banks, life insurance companies, and other financial institutions. The president reasoned that emergency loans from this would help to stabilize these key businesses. The benefits would then "trickle down" to smaller businesses and ultimately bring recovery.
Bonus Army march (1932): This is when a thousand unemployed World War I veterans marched to Washington D.C. to demand immediate payment of the bonuses promised them at a later date (1945)
20th Amendment (1933): This amendment shortened the period between presidential election and inauguration.
Mexican Repatriation (1929-1936): This was a mass deportation of 500,000 to 2,000,000 Mexicans and Mexican Americans, of whom up to 60% were U.S. citizens by birth. Widely blamed for exacerbating the overall economic downturn, Mexicans were further targeted because of "the proximity of the Mexican border, the physical distinctiveness of mestizos, and easily identifiable barrios."

Eleanor Roosevelt: This was the most active first lady in history by writing a newspaper column, giving speeches, and traveling the country. Served as the president's social conscience and influenced him to support minorities and the less fortunate.
Relief; Reform; Recovery: These were FDR's three strategies for bringing back the economy. It provided immediate help for the unemployed, made sure that business and the economy as a whole grow, and created economic institutions and providing greater security or benefits for various groups of Americans.
Brain Trust: This was a group of university professors that President FDR turned to for advice on economic matters.
Frances Perkins: This was the first woman ever to serve in a president's cabinet (secretary of labor).
Emergency Banking Act (1933): This First New Deal act was an attempt to stabilize the banking system. It called for President FDR declaring a bank holiday, where every bank was closed to allow time for the federal government to reorganize them on a sound basis. This act allowed the twelve Federal Reserve Banks to issue additional currency on good assets so that banks that reopened would be able to meet every legitimate call.
Beer-Wine Revenue Act (1933): This First New Deal act act legalized the sale of beer and wine, and raised needed tax money. It also gave individual states the option to further regulate the sale and distribution of beer and wine.
21st Amendment (1933): This amendment repealed the 18th amendment, bringing Prohibition to an end.
Fireside chats: This was when FDR went on the radio to talk to the American public.
Glass Steagall Act (1933): This First New Deal act increased regulation of the banks and limited how banks could invest customers' money. It created the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC), which was a corporation that guaranteed individual bank deposits. It got rid of the gold standard for Americans, but kept the gold for international trade.
Federal Emergency Relief Administration (1933): This First New Deal program sent funds te depleting local relief agencies, and also funded public work programs. It created the Civil works Administration, which was established to rapidly create manual labor jobs for millions of unemployed workers. Most of the jobs were construction jobs, mainly improving or constructing buildings and bridges.
Public Works Administration (1933): This First New Deal program allotted money to state and local governments for building roads, bridges, dams, and other public works. Such construction projects were a source of thousands of jobs. One of this' most successful parts was that it put Americans back to work, thereby increasing their purchasing power.
Civilian Conservation Corps (1933 - 1942): This First New Deal program employed young men (18-25) who lived in rural areas on projects on federal lands and paid their families small monthly sums. Earning $1 a day to be sent home to their family, they also received free board and job training. This program taught over 2.5 million American men how to save wisely and live independently, thus increasing their self sufficiency and esteem.
Tennessee Valley Authority (1933): This First New Deal program was a huge experiment in regional development and public planning. It hired thousands of people in one of the nation's poorest regions to build dams, operate electric power plants, control flooding and erosion, and manufacture fertilizer. It sold electricity to residents of the region at rates that were well below those previously charged by a private power company.
National Industrial Recovery Act (NIRA) (1933): (Title I) This First New Deal program was an attempt to guarantee reasonable profits for business and fair wages and hours for labor. With the antitrust laws temporarily suspended, this could help each industry set codes for wages, hours of work, levels of production, and prices of finished goods under the National Recovery Administration (NRA) that this act created. (Title II) This act also established the Public Works Administration (PWA), which outlined the projects and funding opportunities it could engage in. (7a) The law creating this also gave workers the right to organize and bargain collectively and set a minimum wage.
Schechter v. U.S. (1935): This was the court case that declared that the National Industrial Recovery Act was unconstitutional because the "codes of fair competition" violated the constitutional separation of powers (executive was taking over legislature under the Commerce Clause). The NIRA was controlling intrastate commerce, which wasn't allowed in the first place.
Agricultural Adjustment Act (AAA) (1933): This First New Deal act encouraged farmers to reduce production and thereby boost prices by offering to pay government subsidies for every acre they plowed under. Eventually, this was declared unconstitutional in U.S. v. Butler (1936).
Federal Securities Act (1934): This First New Deal act required full disclosure of information on stocks and investments sold to the public to protect investors from fraud and insider trading. It created the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC), which was a program created to regulate the stock market and to place strict limits on the kind of speculative practices that had led to the Wall Street crash in 1929.
National housing Act / Federal housing Act / Capehart Act (1934): This First New Deal program was passed in order to make housing and home mortgages more affordable. It created the Federal Housing Administration, which gave both the construction industry and homeowners a boost by insuring bank loans for building new houses and repairing old ones. A related program was the Home Owners' Loan Corporation [act] (HOLC), which provided refinancing of homes to prevent foreclosures.

Banking Act of 1935: This Second New Deal act changed the structure and power distribution in the Federal Reserve System that began with the Banking Act of 1933 and made the FDIC permanent.
Works Progress Administration (1935-1943): This Second New Deal program spent billions of dollars to provide people with jobs. After its first year of operation, it employed 3.4 million men and women who had formerly been on the relief rolls of state and local governments. It paid them double the relief rate but less than the going wage for regular workers. Most workers were put to work constructing new bridges, roads, airports, and public buildings. Unemployed artists, writers, actors, and photographers were paid by this to paint murals, write histories, and perform in plays. in the Federal Writers' Project, Federal Art Project, and Federal Music Project.
(1) Federal Writers' Project; (2) Federal Art Project; (3) Federal Music Project (1935): All three of these Second New Deal projects were created under the Works Progress Administration (WPA). (1) This project was created to jobs for out-of-work writers. It produced thousands of publications over its existence including state guides, city guides, local histories, oral histories, ethnographies, children's books, and other works. (2) This project funded the visual arts in the U.S. and was created as a relief measure to employ artists and artisans to create arts and crafts. (3) This project was created to employ musicians, conductors, and composers. These musicians would perform thousands of concerts, offer music classes, host music festivals, create 34 new orchestras, and organized the Composers Forum Laboratory.
National Youth Administration (NYA) (1935): This Second New Deal administration provided grants to high school and college students in exchange for work. This allowed young people to continue studying while at the same time preventing the pool of unemployed youth from getting any larger. It also aimed to combine economic relief with on-the-job training in federally funded work projects designed to provide youth with marketable skills for the future.
National Labor Relations (Wagner) Act (1935): This Second New Deal act replaced the labor provisions of the National Industrial Recovery act, after that law was declared unconstitutional. It set up the National Labor Relations Board (NLRB), which guaranteed a worker's right to join a union and a union's right to bargain collectively. It also outlawed business practices that were unfair to labor.
Social Security Act (1935): This Second New Deal act created a federal based insurance program based upon the automatic collection of payments from employees and employers throughout people's working careers. This fund would then be used to make monthly payments to retired persons over the age of 65. Also receiving benefits under this new law were workers who lost their jobs (unemployment compensation), persons who were blind or otherwise disabled, and dependent children and their mothers.
Revenue Act of 1935: This Second New Deal act raised federal income tax on higher income levels, by introducing the "Wealth Tax". It was a progressive tax that took up to 75% of the highest incomes. It was popularly known as the "Soak the Rich" tax.
Rural Electrification Act (1936): This Second New Deal act provided federal loans for the installation of electrical distribution systems to serve isolated rural areas. Before this was passed in Congress, President FDR issued Executive Order 7037, which created the Rural Electrification Administration, which did the same thing.
Resettlement Administration (RA) (1935): This Second New Deal administration relocated struggling urban and rural families to communities planned by the federal government. Its main focus was to build relief camps in California for migratory workers, especially refugees from the drought-struck Dust Bowl of the Southwest
Farm Security Administration (FSA) (1937): This Second New Deal administration stressed "rural rehabilitation" efforts to improve the lifestyle of sharecroppers, tenants, very poor landowning farmers, and a program to purchase land owned by poor farmers and resettle them in group farms on land more suitable for efficient farming. It also loaned more than $1 billion to farmers and set up camps for migrant workers. Temporary housing for Dust Bowl refugees from whom migrated to California was also established.
Agricultural Adjustment Act (AAA) (1938): This Second New Deal act was enacted as an alternative and replacement for the farm subsidy policies, in the previous AAA that was declared unconstitutional. This act revived the provisions in the previous AAA, with the exception that the financing of the law's programs would be provided by the federal government and not a processor's tax, and was also enforced as a response to the success of the Soil Conservation and Domestic Allotment Act of 1936.
Keynesian Economics: This is the act of engaging in deficit spending to bring an economy out of depression. Deficit spending is massive government spending, in excess of revenue, raised by borrowing rather than from taxation. Since taxation discourages spending, this will stimulate an economy by increasing consumer demand of goods and fueling the multiplier effect.
Executive Order 6102 (1933): This executive order was signed by FDR, getting rid of the gold standard for Americans, but kept the gold for international trade.

Demagogues: These were critics of the new deal who sought their support by appealing to popular desires and prejudices rather than by using rational argument.
Father Charles Coughlin: This Catholic priest attracted a huge popular following in the early 1930s through his weekly radio broadcasts. he wanted inflated currency and nationalizing of all banks. However, his attacks on the New Deal became increasingly anti-Semitic and Fascist until his superiors in the Catholic Church ordered him to stop his broadcasts.
Francis Townsend: This retired physician proposed a simple plan for guaranteeing a secure income. He proposed that a 2% federal sales tax be used to create a special fund, from which every retired person over 60 years old would receive $200 a month. Eventually led to the Social Security system.
Huey Long: This senator from Louisiana proposed the "Share Our Wealth" program, which promised a minimum annual income of $5,000 for every American family, to be paid for by taxing the wealthy [Populist]. He was killed by an assassin.
Supreme Court Reorganization Plan / "Court Packing" (1937): This plan hoped to remove the Supreme Court as an obstacle to the New Deal by proposing a judicial-reorganization bill. It proposed that the president be authorized to appoint to the Supreme Court an additional justice for each current justice who was older than a certain age (70 + 1/2 years). This would have allowed FDR to add up to six more justices to the Court -- all of them presumably of liberal persuasion.

Committee of Industrial Organizations: (1936) This was when the AFL allowed union membership to extended to all workers in an industry regardless of their race and sex, including those who were unskilled, so they all joined together as this.
Congress of Industrial Organizations (1938): This was when the AFL suspended the Committee of Industrial Organizations, leading to the creation of this organization, which broke away from the AFL and became its chief rival.
Sit-down strike (1937): This was when workers at General Motors in Flint, Michigan insisted on their right to join a union by participating in this kind of strike. The company yielded to striker demands by recognizing the United Auto Workers union.
Fair Labor Standards Act (1938): This Second New Deal act established a maximum 40-hour, five-day workweek, national minimum wage, guaranteed time-and-a-half, and prohibited child labor under the age of 16. This act applied to intra and interstate trade, as well as in the private and public sector.

Dust Bowl (1930s): This was a severe drought that ruined crops in the Great Plains. This region became known as this.
The Grapes of Wrath (1939): This book, written by John Steinbeck, is about farmers' hardships during the Dust Bowl and is a classic study of economic heartbreak.
Marian Anderson: This distinguished African American singer had been refused the use of Constitution Hall in Washington D.C. by the all-white Daughters of the American Revolution. However, blacks received moral support from Eleanor Roosevelt and Harold Ickes when they promptly arranged for this person to give a special concert at the Lincoln Memorial.
Mary McLeod Bethune: This person was a longtime leader of efforts for improving education and economic opportunities for women. This person was invited to Washington to direct a division of the National Youth Administration. She established the Federal Council on Negro Affairs for the purpose of increasing African American involvement in the New Deal.
Executive Order 8802 (1941): This executive order set up the Fair Employment Practices Committee to assist minorities in gaining jobs in defense industries.
A. Philip Randolph: This person was the head of the Railroad Porters Union, and threatened a march on Washington to demand equal job opportunities for African Americans
Indian Reorganization (Wheeler-Howard) Act (1934): This was when Congress repealed the Dawes act of 1887, which had encouraged American Indians to be independent farmers, and replaced it with this act. The New measure returned lands to the control of tribes and supported preservation of Indian cultures.
Black Cabinet / Black Brain Trust / Federal Council of Negro Affairs: This was the informal term for a group of African-Americans who served as public policy advisors to President FDR.

~~Chapter 25: Diplomacy and World War II, 1929-1945

Good Neighbor policy (1933): This was FDR's policy toward other nations of the Western Hemisphere. It involved ending dollar diplomacy and seeking Latin American cooperation in defending the region from potential danger.
Pan-American conferences (1933, 1936): These conferences were when (1) FDR pledged never again to intervene in the internal affairs of a Latin American country, and (2) FDR personally pledged to submit future disputes to arbitration and also warned that if a European power such as Germany attempted "to commit acts of aggression against us," it would find "a hemisphere wholly prepared to consult together for our mutual safety and our mutual good."
Recognition of the Soviet Union (1933): This occurred because FDR wanted to increase U.S. trade and thereby boost the economy during the Great Depression.
Tydings-McDuffie Act (1934): This act provided independence for the Philippines by 1946 and gradual removal of U.S. military presence from the islands, since governing the Philippines cost money.
Reciprocal Tariff Act (of 1934): This act gave the president power to negotiate with foreign nations to reduce tariffs in return for reciprocal reduction in tariffs in the United States.

Manchuria / Manchukuo (1930s): This territory was invaded by Japan and was renamed this, where Japan established a puppet government.
Stimson Doctrine (1932): This doctrine declared that the United States would honor its treaty obligations under the Nine-Power Treaty (1922) by refusing to recognize the legitimacy of any regime like "Manchukuo" that had been established by force. This was endorsed by the League of Nations, who issued a similar declaration.
Fascism (1930s): This is the idea that people should glorify their nation and their race through an aggressive show of force.
Benito Mussolini (1922): This person led Italy's Fascist party and seized power in Italy. The party attracted dissatisfied war veterans, nationalists, and those afraid of rising communism.
Adolf Hitler (1920) (1933): This person was the leader of the Nazi party (1), which arose in reaction to deplorable economic conditions after the war and national resentments over the Treaty of Versailles. This person used bullying tactics against Jews as well as Fascist ideology to increase his popularity with disgruntled, unemployed German workers, and eventually gained control of the German legislature (2).
Axis Powers (1940s): This was an alliance between Germany, Italy, and Japan.
Spanish Civil War (1936): This war was viewed in Europe and the United States as an ideological struggle between the forces of fascism, led by General Francisco Franco, and the forces of the republicanism, called Loyalists. Eventually, fascists prevailed and established a military dictatorship.
Ethiopia (1935): This country was taken over by Italy to prove fascism's military might. The League of Nations and the United States objected but did nothing to stop the Italian aggressor.
Rhineland (1936): This region in western Germany was supposed to be permanently demilitarized according to the Versailles Treaty; however, Hitler openly defied the treaty by ordering German troops to march into this region.
Munich (1938): This place was where a meeting took place where British prime minister Neville Chamberlain and French president Edouard Daladier, with FDR's support, met with Hitler and Mussolini to discuss Hitler's right to take over Sudetenland, a strip of land in Czechoslovakia where most people were German-speaking. To maintain peace, Britain and France agreed to allow Hitler to take the Sudetenland, leading to this place becoming synonymous with appeasement.
German-Soviet Non-aggression Pact (1939): This was an agreement between Germany and the Soviet Union to take no military action against each other for the next 10 years.
Poland; blitzkrieg (1939): This country was the first to fall to this type of warfare, which involved Germany's overwhelming use of air power and fast-moving tanks. (lightning war)

Nye Committee (1934): This was an investigating committee that bolstered the view that U.S. entry into world War I had been a terrible mistake when it concluded that the main reason for U.S. participation in the world war was te serve the greed of bankers and arms manufacturers.
Neutrality Acts (1935, 1936, 1937, 1939): These were three acts. (1) authorized the president to prohibit all arms shipments and to forbid U.S. citizens to travel on the ships of belligerent nations \n(2) forbade the extension of loans and credits to belligerents \n(3) forbade the shipment of arms to the opposing sides in the civil war in Spain. \n(4) lifted the arms embargo and put all trade with belligerent nations under the terms of "cash-and-carry."
America First Committee (1940): This was formed to mobilize American public opinion against war. It engaged speakers such as Charles Lindbergh to travel the country warning against re-engaging in Europe's troubles.

Quarantine speech (1937): This speech proposed that the democracies acted together to "quarantine" the aggressor. It was caused by Japan invading China. Public reaction to the speech was overwhelmingly negative, and FDR dropped the idea as politically unwise.
"Cash and carry" (1939): This clause provided that a belligerent could buy U.S. arms if it used its own ships and paid cash. It was neutral, but in practice, it strongly favored Britain.
Selective Training and Service Act (1940): This law provided compulsory military service. It provided for the registration of all American men between the ages of 21 and 35 and for the training of 1.2 million troops in just one year.
Destroyers-for-bases deal (1940): This deal was arranged by FDR to help Britain control the Atlantic. It involved FDR selling 50 older but still serviceable U.S. destroyers and gave the U.S. the right to build military bases on British islands in the Caribbean.
Four Freedoms speech (1941): This was a speech by FDR that proposed lending money to Britain for the purchase of U.S. war materials. He justified such a policy by arguing that the United States must help other nations defend "four freedoms - " freedom of speech, religion, want, and freedom from fear.
Lend-Lease Act (1941): This was a proposal by FDR to end the cash-and-carry requirement of the Neutrality Act of 1939 and permitting Britain to obtain all the U.S. arms it needed on credit.
Atlantic Charter (1941): This was a document drawn in a secret meeting with British Prime Minister Winston Churchill aboard a ship off the coast of Newfoundland. It affirmed that the general principles for a sound peace after the war would include self-determination for all people, no territorial expansion, and free trade.
Oil and steel embargo (1941): This embargo occurred when Japan joined the Axis, and applied to all countries except Britain and the nations of the Western Hemisphere. This embargo was negotiated with Japan several times, but either nation refused to change their stance every time (U.S. wanted Japan to draw out of China).
Pearl Harbor (1941): This was a surprise bombing by Japanese planes from aircraft carriers, lasting less than two hours. 2,400 Americans were killed, almost 1,200 wounded, 20 warships sunk or severely damaged, and approximately 150 airplanes were destroyed.

War Production Board (1942): This board was created to direct all war production, including procuring and allocating raw materials, to maximize the nations war machine on the frontlines in Europe and the Pacific.
Office of Price Administration (1941): This administration was created regulate almost every aspect of civilians' lives by freezing prices, wages, and rents and rationing such commodities as meat, sugar, gasoline, and auto tires, primarily to fight wartime inflation.
Office of Research and development (1941): This office was established to contract scientists and universities to help in the development of electronics, such as radar and sonar, medicines such as penicillin, jet engines, rockets, and in the top secret Manhattan Project.
Manhattan Project (1940s): This was an American effort to create a nuclear bomb. Robert Oppenheimer was in charge of putting the pieces together in the main assembly plant at Los Alamos, in New Mexico.
Smith-Connally Anti-Strike Act (of 1943): This act empowered the government to take over war-related businesses whose operations were threatened by a strike.
Office of War Information (1942-1945): This office was created primarily to maintain public morale, encourage people to conserve resources, and increase war production. It controlled news about troop movements and battles. Movies, radio and popular music all supported and reflected a cheerful, patriotic view of the war.
"The Good War": This was a nickname for World War II because of the unity of Americans behind the war's democratic ideals. In addition, Norman Rockwell's popular illustrations of the "Four Freedoms" captured the liberties and values at stake in the war.

"Double V" campaign (1942): This was a slogan and drive to promote the fight for democracy abroad and within the United States for African Americans during World War II. This refers to the "V for victory" sign prominently displayed by countries fighting "for victory over aggression, slavery, and tyranny," but adopts a second "V" to represent the double victory for African Americans fighting for freedom overseas and at home.
Congress of Racial Equality (CORE) (1942): This was formed to work more militantly for African American interests. It was a more assertive (nonviolent direct action) civil rights organization that demanded full desegregation in public accomodations.
Executive Order 8802 (1941): This executive order by FDR prohibited discrimination in defense industries that received federal government contracts during WWII. It also created the Fair Employment Practices Commission (FEPC) to monitor compliance/enforcement of the Executive Order.
Smith v. Allwright (1944): This was a court case that ruled that it was unconstitutional to deny membership in political parties to African Americans as a way of excluding them from voting in primaries.
Braceros program (1942): This program allowed Mexican farmworkers to enter the United States in the harvest season without going through formal immigration procedures.
Executive order 9066 (1942): This executive order authorized the U.S. military to force 110,000 Japanese and their American-born children on the West Coast into isolated relocation centers (internment camps) because they were perceived as threats to national security.
Korematsu v. U.S. (1944): This court case upheld the U.S. government's internment policy as justified in wartime. Similar to Schenck v. U.S. (1919) showing civil liberties were not absolute during a time of war.
"Rosie the Riveter" (1943): This person was an American cultural icon from World War II, encouraging women to take industrial defense jobs (women worked in factories to replace men who were away serving in the military.). However, women were paid well below that of male factory workers.

Battle of the Atlantic (1939-1945): This was a naval war to control the shipping lanes. German submarines sank over 500 Allied ships, but the Allies developed ways of containing the submarine menace through the use of radar, sonar, and the bombing of German naval bases. This strategy would be known as defense at sea, attacks by air.
D-Day: This was the invasion date where British, Canadian, and U.S. forces under the command of General Eisenhower secured several beachheads on the Normandy coast. After this bloody but successful attack, the Allied offensive moved rapidly to roll back German occupying forces.
Battle of the Bulge (1944): This was a desperate counterattack in Belgium by Germans to stop the Allied forces offensive.
Holocaust (1933-1945): These were German concentration camps and was the Nazi's program of genocide against the Jews and others. Eventually, it would be found that 6 million Jewish civilians and several million non-Jews had been systematically murdered by Nazi Germany.
Island-hopping (1943-1945): This was a strategy to get within striking distance of Japan's home islands. Commanders used this strategy to bypass strongly held Japanese posts and isolate them with naval and air power.
Battle of Midway (1942): This battle marked the last offensive battle for Japan and stopped the growth of Japan in the Pacific. It also put the U.S. in an offensive position to begin shrinking the Japanese empire through island-hopping invasions and several larger naval and air battles.
Douglas MacArthur: This person was the commander of army units in the South Pacific. When he was driven from the islands, he famously vowed, "I shall return."
Kamikaze attacks (1944): This was a Japanese strategy to suicide attack U.S. ships with airplanes.
Hiroshima; Nagasaki (1945): These were two atomic bombs dropped 3 days apart in order to end World War II. About 250,000 Japanese died, either immediately or after a prolonged period of suffering, as a result of the two bombs.

Big Three: These were three countries that arranged to confer secretly to coordinate their military strategies and to lay the foundation for peace terms and postwar involvement for World War II.
Casablanca Conference (1943): This was a conference between FDR and Churchill who agreed on the grand strategy to win the war, including to invade Sicily and Italy and to demand "unconditional surrender" from the Axis powers.
Tehran Conference (1943): This was a conference between the Big Three who agreed that the British and Americans would begin their drive to liberate France in the spring of 1944 and that Soviets would invade Germany and eventually join the war against Japan.
Yalta Conference (1945): This was a conference between the Big Three, who agreed that after victory in Europe was achieved, (1) Germany would be divided into occupation zones, (2) there would be free elections in the liberated countries of Eastern Europe, (3) the Soviets would enter the war against Japan, (4) Soviets would control the southern half of Sakhalin Island and the Kuril Islands in the Pacific and would have special concessions in Manchuria, and (5) a new world peace organization (the future United Nations) would be formed at a conference in San Francisco.
Potsdam Conference (1945): This conference involved the new Harry S. Truman of the U.S. and Clement Attlee of Britain as well as Stalin, who agreed (1) to demand that Japan surrender unconditionally, and (2) to hold war-crime trials of Nazi leaders.
United Nations (1945): This was an international peacekeeping organization that was conceived during World War II and put in place immediately after the war. It included representatives from the U.S., USSR, Great Britain, and China. It would also eventually include France, and a bunch of other small countries.

~Period 8: 1945-1980

~~Chapter 26: Truman and the Cold War, 1945-1952

Servicemen's Readjustment Act (GI Bill) (1944): This act helped returning World War II veterans reintegrate into civilian life by providing them with federal financial aid for education, homes, farms, small businesses, job training, and unemployment insurance.
Baby boom (1945-1960): This was an explosion of marriages and births caused by younger marriages and larger families that resulted in 50 million babies entering the U.S. population.
William J. Levitt; Levittown (1947): This person led a development of postwar suburbia with his building and promotion of this town. This project included 17,000 mass-produced, low-priced family homes on Long Island, New York. Low interest rates on mortgages that were both government-insured and tax deductible made the move from city to suburb affordable for even families of modest means.
White flight (1950s-1960s): This is the movement of white city-dwellers to the suburbs to escape the influx of minorities
Sunbelt: This is a nickname for the states from Florida to California, and was known for its warmer climate, lower taxes, and economic opportunities in defense-related industries.
Harry S. Truman: This was the 33rd president, and was a moderate Democratic senator from Missouri. He replaced the more liberal Henry Wallace as FDR's vice president in the 1944 election.
Employment Act of 1946; Council of Economic Advisers: This act created this to counsel both the president and Congress on means of promoting national economic welfare.
Committee on Civil Rights (1946): This was created by President Truman to challenge racial discrimination. Its purpose was to propose measures to strengthen and protect the civil rights of the American people.
22nd Amendment (1951): This limited a president to a maximum of two full terms in office.
Taft-Hartley Act (1947): This act was created to check the growing power of unions. It (1) outlawed the closed shop, (2) permitted states to pass "right to work" laws outlawing the union ship, (3) outlawed secondary boycotts, and (4) gave the president the power to invoke an 80-day cooling off period before a strike endangering national safety could be called.

Progressive party; Henry Wallace: This was a new party consisting of liberal Democrats who thought President Truman's aggressive foreign policy threatened world peace. They nominated this former vice president in the Election of 1948.
States-Rights party (Dixiecrats); J. Strom Thurmond: This was a new party consisting of Southern Democrats in reaction to President Truman's support for civil rights. This party nominated this person as its presidential candidate in the Election of 1948.
Thomas Dewey: This person was the Republican nominee in the Election of 1948, and conducted an overly cautious and unexciting campaign.
Fair Deal (1949): This was an ambitious reform program created by President Truman. It urged Congress to enact national health care insurance, federal aid to education, civil rights legislation, funds for public housing, and a new farm program. Conservatives in Congress blocked out most of the proposed reforms, except for an increase in minimum wage (40 to 75 cents an hour) and inclusion of more workers under Social Security.
Housing Act (1949): This act provided 800,000 new houses for the poor, increased authorization for the Federal Housing Administration mortgage insurance, and funded research in housing and housing techniques.

Cold War (1940s-1991): This was a war between the Communist empire of the Soviet Union and the leading Western democracy, the United States.
United Nations Security Council: This was a 15 member council that was given the primary responsibility for maintaining international security and authorizing peacekeeping missions. U.S. Great Britain, France, China, and the Soviet Union were all granted permanent seats and veto power in this council.
World Bank (1944): This was created at the Bretton Woods Conference to fund rebuilding of a war-torn world (after WWII). The Soviet Union declined to participate because they viewed this as an instrument of capitalism.
Communist satellites: These are nations under the control of a great power. More specifically, these were countries that elected Communist candidates and served as buffer states as protection for Soviet Russia against another Hitler-like invasion from the West.
Iron Curtain (1946): This was a speech by former British Prime Minister Winston Churchill that declared that there is a separation between the west and east Europe. It called for a partnership between Western democracies to halt the expansion of communism.

George Kennan; Containment policy (1946): This person was an expert on Soviet affairs and wrote the Long Telegram, argued for this policy that wanted "a long-term, patient but firm and vigilant containment of Russian expansive tendencies" would eventually cause the Soviets to back off their Communist ideology of world domination and live in peace with other nations.
Truman Doctrine (1947): This was President Truman's containment policy in response to two threats, (1) a Communist-led uprising against the government in Greece, and (2) Soviet demands for some control of a water route in Turkey, the Dardanelles. The policy asked Congress for $400 million in economic and military aid to assist the "free people" of Greece and Turkey against "totalitarian" regimes.
(George Marshall); Marshall Plan (1947): This was an extensive program of U.S. economic aid to help European nations revive their economies and strengthen democratic governments. President Truman submitted to Congress $17 billion for this program, and eventually $12 billion in aid was approved for distribution to the countries of Western Europe over a four-year period. It was also offered to the Soviet Union and its Eastern European satellites, but the Soviets refused it, fearing that it would lead to dependence on the United States.
Berlin airlift(1948-1949): This was when President Truman ordered U.S. planes to fly in supplies to the people of West Berlin because the Soviet Union had cut off all access by land to Berlin. 11 months later, Stalin opened up the highways to Berlin and ended the blockade.
East Germany (German Democratic Republic): This was the soviet satellite for the Soviet Union, and was the Communist Germany.
West Germany (Federal Republic of Germany): This was the Capitalist Germany and an ally to the United States.
North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) (1949): This was a military alliance for defending all members (10 European nations and U.S. and Canada) from an outside attack. President Truman sent General Eisenhower as this alliance's Supreme Commander and stationed U.S. troops in Western europe as a deterrent against a Soviet invasion. This was a change from Washington's farewell address, as now the U.S. has joined in a permanent alliance with European nations.
Warsaw Pact (1955): This was a military alliance for the defense of the Communist states of Eastern Europe as a reaction to NATO.
National Security Act (1947): This act provided for (1) a centralized Department of Defense (replacing the War Department) to coordinate the operations of the army, navy, and air force; (2) the creation of the National Security Council (NSC) to coordinate the making of foreign policy in the Cold War; and (3) the creation of the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) to employ spies to gather information on foreign governments.
NSC-68 (1950): This was a secret report by the National Security Council (NSC) that the following measures were necessary for fighting the Cold War- (1) Quadruple the U.S. government spending to 20 percent of GNP, (2) Form alliances with non-Communist countries around the world, and (3) Convince the American public that a costly arms buildup was imperative for the nation's defense.

U.S.-Japanese Security Treaties (1951): These were treaties that (1) made Japan surrender its claims to Korea and islands in the Pacific, and ended formal occupation of Japan from the U.S.. The second one provided for U.S. troops to remain in military bases in Japan for that country's protection against external enemies, particularly Communists.
Formosa/Taiwan: This was the place where Chinese Nationalists had retreated to because the Communist party had taken over China. Nationalist leader Chiang still claimed to be the legitimate government for all of China, and was supported by the U.S.
Mao Zedong: This person was the leader of the Chinese Communists.
Chiang Kai-shek: This was the leader of the Chinese Nationalists
People's Republic of China: This was the name of China after the Communist party had taken over under the leader Mao Zedong. It would not receive recognition from the United States until 30 years later, in 1979.
Korean War (1950-1953): This war was started when Communist North Korea invaded Democratic South Korea. President Truman's response was calling a special session of the U.N. Security Council to help South Korea.
Kim II Sung: This person was the leader of Communist North Korea after World War II.
Syngman Rhee: This person was the leader of Democratic South Korea after World War II.
38th parallel: This is the mark used for the border between North Korea and South Korea.
"Soft on communism": This was a phrase used by Republicans to characterize Truman and the Democrats because of the stalemate in Korea and the loss of China during the Korean War.

Second Red Scare: This was hysteria over the perceived threat of communists in the US following WWII. It was caused by rivalry between the Us and USSR and raised concerns in the U.S. that communist and leftist sympathizers inside the US might actively work as Soviet spies.
Loyalty Review Board (1947-1951): This was a board set up by the Truman administration under pressure from Republican critics. This board's task was to investigate the background of more than 3 million federal employees. Thousands of officials and civil service employees either resigned or lost their jobs in a probe that went on for four years.
Smith Act(1940): This act made it illegal to advocate or teach the overthrow of the government by force or to belong to an organization with this objective.
Dennis et al. v. United States (1951): This case upheld the constitutionality of the Smith Act of 1940.
Executive Order 9981 (1948): This was an executive order that abolished racial discrimination in the United States Armed Forces and eventually led to the end of segregation in the services.
McCarran Internal Security Act (1950): This act (1) made it unlawful to advocate or support the establishment of a totalitarian government, (2) restricted the employment and travel of those joining Communist-front organizations, and (3) authorized the creation of detention camps for subversives.
House of Un-American Activities Committee (1939): This committee was originally established in 1939 to seek out Nazis, but was reactivated after WWII to find Communists. This committee not only investigated government officials but also looked for Communist influence in such organizations as the Boy Scouts and in Hollywood film industry. Actors, directors, and writers were called before the committee to testify. Those who refused to testify were tried for contempt of Congress. Others were blacklisted from the industry.
Albert Hiss case (1948): This was a case in which a confessed Communist, Whittaker Chambers, led to the trial of Alger Hiss, a prominent official in the State Department who had assisted Roosevelt at the Yalta Conference. Hiss denied the accusations that he was a Communist and had given secret documents to Chambers. In 1950, however, Hiss was convicted of perjury and sent to prison.
Rosenberg case (1951) (executed 1953): This was a case involving an FBI investigation tracing a spy ring to Julius and Ethel Rosenberg in New York because Klaus Fuchs, a British scientist who worked on the Manhattan Project, admitted giving A-bomb secrets to the Russians. The two Rosenberg's were found guilty of treason and executed.
Joseph McCarthy: This person was a Republican senator from Wisconsin that used the growing concern over communist in his reelection campaign. He rode the anti communist feelings to make himself one of the most powerful men in America based entirely on people's fear of the damage this person could do if his accusing finger pointed their way.
McCarthyism (1950): This was the term for the "witch hunt" for Communists.


~~Chapter 27: The Eisenhower Years, 1952-1960

Dwight Eisenhower: This person was the 34th president. His campaign slogan was "I Like Ike", which expressed the genuine feelings of millions of middle-class Americans. They liked his winning smile and trusted and admired this former general who had successfully commanded Allied forces in Europe in World War II.
Adlai Stevenson: This was the Democratic candidate in the Election of 1952. He was a popular Illinois governor whose wit, eloquence, and courage in confronting McCarthyism appealed to liberals.
Checkers speech (1952): This was a speech by Richard Nixon that saved his political future by effectively defending himself using the new medium of television. In this speech, Nixon won the support of millions of viewers by tugging at their heartstrings. With his wife and daughters around him. he emotionally vowed never to return the gift of their beloved dog with this name.
Modern Republicanism: This was a balanced and moderate approach to government spending. Eisenhower showed this through his extension of Social Security to 10 million more citizens, raising the minimum wage, and building more houses. However, Eisenhower opposed the ideas of federal health care insurance and federal aid to education.
Department of Health, Education, and Welfare (HEW) (1953): This department was created by President Eisenhower and led by Oveta Culp Hobby, the first woman in a Republican cabinet.
Soil-bank program (1956): This was a program that was initiated as means of reducing farm production and thereby increasing farm income.
Federal Aid Highway Act (1956): This act authorized construction of 42,000 miles of interstate highways linking all the nation's major cities. When completed, the U.S. highway system became a model for the rest of the world.

John Foster Dulles: This person was the Secretary of State under Eisenhower's presidency and helped to shape U.S. foreign policy.
"Brinkmanship": This was the mentality of Secretary of State John Foster Dulles that if the United States pushed Communist powers to the brink of war, they would back down because of American nuclear superiority.
Massive retaliation (1954): This is a policy shown by Nuclear weapons as a powerful deterrent against the superpowers fighting an all-out war between themselves.
India, Pakistan (1947), Indonesia (1949), Ghana (1957); *Third World Countries: These were countries that gained independence from former colonial powers such as Britain, France, and the Netherlands between 1947 and 1962. These often lacked stable political and economic institutions. Their need for foreign aid from either the United States or the Soviet Union often made them into pawns of the Cold War.
CIA, covert action (1953): This is the term used for undercover intervention in the internal politics of other nations. This government agency helped overthrow a government in Iran that had tried to nationalize the holding of foreign oil companies, allowing the return of Reza Pahlavi as shah of Iran. The shah in return provided the West with favorable oil prices and made enormous purchases of American arms.

Korean armistice (1953): This was an agreement between China and North Korea to exchange prisoners, leading to U.S. withdrawal of troops in Korea. This was mainly caused by the sudden death of Joseph Stalin in 1953. Korea would remain divided near the 38th parallel, and despite years of futile negotiations, no peace treaty was ever concluded between North Korea and South Korea.
Indochina: This was a Southeast Asian colony controlled by France. It was lost in World War II to Japanese Invaders, and when the French tried to retake it, native Vietnamese and Cambodians resisted.
Ho Chi Minh: This person was the nationalist and Communist leader of Indochina. In 1950, Indochina became part of the Cold War rivalry between Communist and anti-communist powers.
Geneva Conference (1954): This conference made France agree to give up Indochina, which was divided into the independent nations of Cambodia, Laos, and Vietnam. It was caused by a disastrous defeat when a large French army at Dien Bien Phu was trapped and forced to surrender.
North Vietnam: This country was led by Communist leader Ho Chi Minh. It's southern boundary is at the 17th parallel.
South Vietnam: This country was led by Ngo Dinh Diem, whose support came largely from anti-communist, Catholic, and urban people, many of whom had fled from Communist rule.
Domino theory (1954): This was a theory that if South Vietnam fell under Communist control, one nation after another in Southeast Asia would also fall, until Australia and New Zealand were in dire danger.
Southeast Asia Treaty Organization (SEATO) (1954): This was a pact put together by Dulles to prevent South Vietnam, Laos, and Cambodia from "falling" to communism. It was signed by eight nations, including the U.S., Great Britain, France, Australia, New Zealand, the Philippines, Thailand, and Pakistan.

State of Israel (1948): This nation was created under U.N. auspices after a civil war in the British mandate territory of Palestine left the land divided between two countries. This nation's neighbors, including Egypt, had fought unsuccessfully to prevent this Jewish state from being formed.
Suez Canal crisis (1956): This was a crisis caused by Arab nationalist General Gamal Nasser seizing and nationalizing this British and French-owned canal that passed through Egyptian territory. Loss of this canal threatened Western Europe's supply line to Middle Eastern oil. In response, Britain, France, and Israel carried out a surprise attack against Egypt and retook the canal. Eisenhower was furious that he had been kept in the dark about the attack, and sponsored a U.N. resolution condemning the invasion of Egypt, forcing them to withdraw.
Eisenhower Doctrine (1957): This doctrine pledged economic and military aid to any Middle Eastern country threatened by communism. This was later enforced by sending 14,000 marines to Lebanon to prevent civil war between Christians and Muslims.
Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC) (1960): This was when Arab nations of Saudi Arabia, Kuwait, Iraq, and Iran joined Venezuela to form this organization. They would eventually place an embargo on Israel and its supporters, causing a worldwide oil shortage, damaging U.S. economy.

Atoms for peace: This was a peace plan that called for a slowdown in the arms race. It was agreed upon by both the U.S. and USSR. The USSR withdrew their troops from Austria and established peaceful relations with Greece and Turkey.
Geneva Summit; "Spirit of Geneva" (1955): In this meeting the U.S. president proposed an "open skies" policy over each other's territory -- open to aerial photography by the opposing nation -- in order to eliminate the chance of a surprise nuclear attack. The Soviets rejected the proposal, but it still produced the first thaw in the Cold War, and caused the press to give it this nickname.
Nikita Khrushchev: This person was the new Soviet leader after Stalin, and in 1956, he denounced the crimes of Joseph Stalin and supported "peaceful coexistence" with the West.
Hungarian revolt (1956): This was when a popular uprising in Hungary succeeded in overthrowing a government backed by Moscow. Nikita Khrushchev sent in Soviet tanks to crush the freedom fighters and restore control over Hungary. U.S. had no involvement, giving de facto recognition to the Soviet sphere of influence in Eastern Europe and ended Dulles' talk of "liberating" this region.
Sputnik I and II (1957): These were the first satellites launched by the Soviet Union into orbit around the earth. This questioned the technological leadership of the United States and added to American embarrassment when U.S. rockets designed to duplicate the Soviet achievement failed repeatedly.
National Defense and Education Act (NDEA) (1958): This act authorized giving hundreds of millions in federal money to the schools for math, science, and foreign language education. This happened because American schools lacked proper math and science instruction and failed to produce more scientists and engineers.
National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) (1958): This act directed the U.S. efforts to build missiles and explore outer space. Billions were appropriated to compete with the Russians in the space race.
Second Berlin Crisis (1958-1959): This was when Soviet leader Khrushchev pushed the Berlin issue by giving the West six months to pull its troops out of West Berlin before turning over the city to the East Germans. However, the U.S. refused to yield. To stop the crisis, Eisenhower invited Khrushchev to visit the U.S.. At the presidential retreat of Camp David in Maryland, the two agreed to put off the crisis and scheduled another summit conference in Paris for 1960. This friendly incident was nicknamed the "spirit of Camp David".
U-2 incident: This was when an American spy plane was shot down at a high-altitude by the Soviet Union while it was flying over the Soviet Union. This was because after the rejection of the open-skies proposals, the U.S. had decided to conduct regular spy flights over Soviet territory to find out about its enemy's missile program. Eisenhower took full responsibility, but this only caused Khrushchev to walk out of the Paris summit, ending the thaw in the Cold War.
Cuban Revolution (1953-1959): This was when Cuba was overthrown by communist revolutionary Fidel Castro. No one knew whether Castro's politics would be better or worse than those of his ruthless predecessor. Castro nationalized American-owned business and properties in Cuba, and Eisenhower retaliated by cutting off U.S. trade with Cuba. This caused Castro to turn to Soviets for support.
Military-industrial complex: This is an informal alliance between a nation's military and the arms industry which supplies it, seen together as a vested interest which influences public policy.

Jackie Robinson: This person broke the color line in 1947 by being hired by the Brooklyn Dodgers as the first African American to play on a major league team since the 1880s
Thurgood Marshall: This person was the leader of NAACP lawyers and argued in the 1950s for African American civil rights.
Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka (1954): This court case ruled that segregation of black children in the public schools was unconstitutional because it violated the 14th Amendment's guarantee of "equal protection of laws."
Earl Warren: This chief justice ruled in Brown v. BOE (1954) that (1) "separate facilities are inherently unequal" and unconstitutional, and (2) school segregation should end with "all deliberate speed." He would eventually have an impact on the nation comparable to that of John Marshall in the early 1800s. He profoundly affected the criminal justice system, state political systems, and the definition of individual rights. Before his tenure as chief justice, the Supreme Court had concentrated on protecting property rights. During and after his tenure, the Court focused more no protecting individual rights.
Massive Resistance (1954): This was a strategy declared by U.S. Senator Harry F. Byrd, Sr. of Virginia along with his brother-in-law as the leader in the Virginia General Assembly, Democrat Delegate James M. Thomson of Alexandria, to unite white politicians and leaders in the South in a campaign of new state laws and policies to prevent public school desegregation, particularly after the Brown v. Board of Education Supreme Court decision in 1954.
Southern Manifesto (1956): This document was signed by 101 members of Congress, condemning the Supreme Court for a "clear abuse of judicial power."
Little Rock crisis (1957): This was when Arkansas Governor Orval Faubus used the state's National Guard to prevent nine African American students from entering a high school. This caused President Eisenhower to intervene and sign an executive order to order federal troops to stand guard and protect black students.
Rosa Parks: This person refused to give up her seat to a white passenger and got arrested for violating the segregation law, sparking a massive African American protest.
Montgomery bus boycott (1955): This was an African American protest boycott against busses after Rosa Parks was arrested for refusing to give up her seat to a white passenger.
Martin Luther King Jr.: This Reverend and minister of the Baptist church where the Montgomery bus boycott started, emerged as the inspirational leader of a nonviolent movement to end segregation.
Civil Rights Act of 1957: This act was the first civil rights legislation since Reconstruction. This established the Civil Rights Section of Justice Department and empowered federal prosecutors to obtain court injunctions against interference with the right to vote.
Civil Rights Act of 1960: This act was a U.S. federal law that established federal inspection of local voter registration polls and introduced penalties for anyone who obstructed someone's attempt to register to vote.
Southern Christian Leadership Conference (1957): This was formed by Martin Luther King Jr., and organized ministers and churches in the South to get behind the civil rights struggle.
Sit-in movement: This movement began in Greensboro, North Carolina, after college students were refused service at a segregated Woolworth's lunch counter. To call attention to the injustice of segregated facilities, students would deliberately invite arrest by sitting in restricted areas.
"Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee" (SNCC) (1960): This civil rights organization that focused on the state and local levels to coordinate integration and equality efforts among students, appeal to American moral grounding. It consisted mainly of college students. It was led by Stokely Carmichael, who would eventually change its direction after being influenced by Malcolm X. Eventually, this organization moved towards repudiating nonviolence and advocating "black power" (especially economic power) and racial separatism.
Operation Wetback (1954): This operation was when U.S. officials, responding to complaints from native-born workers and from Mexico, forced an estimated 3.8 million people to return to Mexico.

The Lonely Crowd (1958): This book was published by Harvard sociologist David Riesman and criticized the "inner-directed" individuals in society with "other-directed" conformists.
The Affluent Society (1958): This book was written by economist John Kenneth Galbraith, who wrote about the failure of wealthy Americans to address the need for increased social spending for the common good.
The Catcher in the Rye (1951): This book was written by J.D. Salinger and provided classic commentary on "phoniness" as viewed by a troubled teenager.
Catch-22 (1961): This book, written by Joseph Heller, satirized the stupidity of the military and war.
Beatniks (1950): This was a group of rebellious writers and intellectuals led by Jack Kerouac and poet Allen Ginsberg. They advocated spontaneity, use of drugs, and rebellion against societal standards. They would become models for the youth rebellion of the 1960s.

~~Chapter 28: Promise and Turmoil, The 1960s

John F. Kennedy (JFK) (1960-1963): This person was the 35th president and was a charismatic, wealthy, and youthful 43-year-old senator from Massachusetts. He won because of he was better looking and his debates were televised, while Nixon seemed nervous and sweaty.
New Frontier: This was the domestic and foreign policy of John F. Kennedy, who called for aid to education, federal support of health care, urban renewal, and civil rights, but was shot down in Congress. Most were passed later under President Johnson. In addition, he stimulated the economy by increasing spending for defense and space exploration, as he committed the nation to land on the moon by the end of the decade.
Assassination in Dallas (1963): At this place, John F. Kennedy was assassinated as two bullets from Lee Harvey-Oswald found their mark.
Warren Commission: This commission concluded that Oswald was the lone assassin and was headed by Chief Justice Earl Warren.

Peace Corps (1961): This was an organization that recruited young American volunteers to provide labor to help third world countries improve the infrastructure, health care, and education.
Alliance for progress (1961): This promoted land reform and economic development in Latin America. Its goal was to close the gap between the rich and the poor, deterring Communism by providing economic aid. It's similar to the Marshall Plan (1947).
Trade Expansion Act (1962): This act authorized tariff reductions with the recently formed EEC - European Economic Community (Common Market) of Western European nations (which would become the European Union).
Bay of Pigs Invasion (1961): This was when Kennedy approved a CIA scheme to use Cuban exiles to overthrow Fidel Castro's regime in Cuba. Cubans landed at this place but failed to set off a general uprising as planned. Trapped by a coral reef, the anti-Castro Cubans had little choice but to surrender after Kennedy rejected the idea of using U.S. forces to save them.
Berlin Wall (1961): This was when East Germans, with Soviet backing, built a wall around West Berlin. Its purpose was to stop East Germans from fleeing to West Germany. It stood as a gloomy symbol of the Cold War until it was torn down by rebellious East Germans in 1989.
Cuban missile crisis (1962): This was when U.S. reconnaissance planes discovered that the Russians were building underground sites in Cuba for the launching of offensive missiles that could reach the United States in minutes. Kennedy responded by announcing to the world that he was setting up a naval blockade of Cuba until the weapons were removed. Khrushchev agreed to remove the missiles from Cuba in exchange for Kennedy's public pledge not to invade the island nation and to later secretly remove U.S. Jupiter missiles from Turkey.
Nuclear Test Ban Treaty (1963): This treaty ended the testing of nuclear weapons in the atmosphere.This first step in controlling the testing of nuclear arms was offset by a new round in the arms race for developing missile and warhead superiority.
Flexible response: This is a foreign policy that involves increasing spending on conventional (non-nuclear) arms and mobile military forces because nuclear weapons weren't very effective in stopping brushfire wars in 3rd world countries. While this policy reduced the risk of using nuclear weapons, it also increased the temptation to send elite special forces, such as the Green Berets, into combat all over the globe.

Lyndon Johnson (LBJ) (1963-1969): This person was the 36th president. As a native of rural west Texas and a graduate of a little-known teacher's college, he seemed very unsophisticated compared to the wealthy, Harvard-educated Kennedy. On the other hand, he was a skilled politician who had started his career as a devoted Roosevelt Democrat during the Great Depression.
Great Society: This was the domestic program under President Lyndon Johnson that instituted federally sponsored social welfare programs. President Johnson persuaded Congress to pass (1) an expanded version of Kennedy's civil rights bill, and (2) Kennedy's proposal for an income tax cut. The programs also increased funding for mass transit, public housing, rent subsidies for low-income people, and crime prevention.
*The Other America* (1962): This book was written by Michael Harrington and helped to focus national attention on the 40 million Americans still living in poverty. President Johnson responded by declaring 2 years later an "unconditional war on poverty."
Election of 1964: This was an election between Lyndon Johnson with his running mate, Senator Hubert Humphrey, with a clearly liberal agenda, and a staunch conservative, Senator Barry Goldwater of Arizona, who advocated ending the welfare state, including TVA and Social Security. A TV ad by the Democrats pictured Goldwater as a dangerous extremist, who would be quick to involve the United States in nuclear war. However, the doomed Goldwater campaign did energize young conservatives and introduced new conservative voices, such as former film actor and TV host, Ronald Reagan of California.
Economic Opportunity Act of 1964: This Great Society act created the Office of Economic Opportunity (OEO), which provided a billion-dollar budget and sponsored a wide variety of self-help programs for the poor, such as Head Start for preschoolers, which was a program of the United States Department of Health and Human Services that provides comprehensive early childhood education, health, nutrition, and parent involvement services to low-income children and their families, the Job Corps for vocational education, literacy programs, and legal services. The controversial Community Action Program allowed the poor to run anti-poverty programs in their own neighborhoods. It also created VISTA (Volunteers in Service to America), an anti-poverty program as the domestic version of the Peace Corps. Initially, VISTA increased employment opportunities for conscientious people who felt they could contribute tangibly to the War on Poverty. Volunteers served in communities throughout the U.S., focusing on enriching educational programs and vocational training for the nation's underprivileged classes.
Food Stamp Act (1964): This Great Society act expanded the federal program to help poor people buy food. It created the Food Stamp Program.
Wilderness Act of 1964 / Wilderness Preservation Act: This Great Society act created the legal definition of wilderness in the United States and protected 9.1 million acres of federal land. It was the result of a long effort to protect federal wilderness and to create a formal mechanism for designating wilderness.

National Foundation on the Arts and Humanities (1965): This Great Society program provided federal funding for the arts and for creative and scholarly projects. It created the National Endowment for the Humanities, and a separate one for Arts. The humanities endowment was dedicated to supporting research, education, preservation, and public programs in the humanities. The arts endowment offered support and funding for projects exhibiting artistic excellence.
Medical Care Act of 1965: This Great Society act created Medicare, a program that provided health insurance for all people 65 and older, and Medicaid, a program that provided funds to states to pay for medical care for the poor and disabled.
Elementary and Secondary Education Act (1965): This Great Society act provided federal funds to poor school districts, funds for special education programs, and funds to expand Head Start, an early childhood education program.
Higher Education Act (1965): This Great Society act intended "to strengthen the educational resources of our colleges and universities and to provide financial assistance for students in postsecondary and higher education". It increased federal money given to universities, created scholarships, gave low-interest loans for students, and established the National Teachers Corps.
Immigration Act / Immigration and Nationality Act / Hart-Celler Act (1965) / Immigration Bill: This Great Society act abolished discriminatory quotas based on national origins. It marked a change from past U.S. policy which had discriminated against non-northern Europeans. In removing racial and national barriers, it would significantly and unintentionally alter the demographic mix in the U.S.
Child Nutrition Act (1966): This Great Society act was created as a result of the "years of cumulative successful experience under the National School Lunch Program (NSLP) to help meet the nutritional needs of children." This act also established the School Breakfast Program, a federally assisted meal program that provides low-cost or free breakfasts to children in public and non-profit schools as well as child care institutions.
FLSA (1938) amendment; Minimum Wage Act (1966): This Great Society act/amendment expanded coverage of that act to some farm workers and increased the minimum wage to $1.60 per hour in stages. It also gave state and local government employees coverage for the first time.

Urban Mass Transportation Act of 1964: This Great Society act provided $375 million for large-scale urban public or private rail projects in the form of matching funds to cities and states. This also created the Urban Mass Transportation Administration (now the Federal Transit Administration), which provided capital grants for up to 50% of the cost of transit improvements.
Omnibus Housing Act of 1964: This Great Society act provided federal funds to build housing for poor and middle-income families and established a rent-supplement program for them.
Housing and Urban Development Act of 1965: This Great Society act was a major revision to federal housing policy in the United States and instituted several major expansions in federal housing programs. This greatly expanded funding for existing federal housing programs, and added new programs to provide rent subsidies for the elderly and disabled, housing rehabilitation grants to poor homeowners, provisions for veterans to make very low down-payments to obtain mortgages, new authority for families qualifying for public housing to be placed in empty private housing (along with subsidies to landlords), and matching grants to localities for the construction of water and sewer facilities, construction of community centers in low-income areas, and urban beautification.

Department of Transportation (DOT) (1966): This is a federal Cabinet department of the U.S. government concerned with transportation.
Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) (1965): This is a Cabinet department in the Executive branch of the federal government. It was founded to develop and execute policies on housing and metropolises.
*Unsafe at Any Speed*: This book was written by Ralph Nader and caused response by Congress to pass regulations of the automobile industry that would save hundreds of thousands of lives in the following years.
*Silent Spring*: This book was written by Rachel Carson and caused Congress to enact clean air and water laws due to the danger of pesticides.
Lady Bird Johnson: This nickname was given to the wife of President Lyndon Johnson who contributed to improving the environment with her Beautify American campaign, which resulted in the Highway Beautification Act (1965) that removed billboards from federal roads.
Civil Rights Act of 1964: This act made segregation illegal in all public facilities, including hotels and restaurants, and gave the federal government additional powers to enforce school desegregation. This act also set up the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC) to end discrimination in employment the basis of race, religion, sex, or national origin.
24th Amendment (1964): This amendment abolished the practice of collecting a poll tax, one of the measures that, for decades, had discouraged poor people from voting.
Voting Rights Act of 1965: This act was ended literacy tests and provided federal registrars in areas where blacks were kept from voting. It was caused by the (March to Montgomery (1965)), which included killings and brutality in Selma, Alabama, against the voting rights marches led by Martin Luther King Jr. The impact was most dramatic in the Deep South, where African Americans could vote for the first time since the Reconstruction era.

Integration of Ole Miss (1962): This was when James Meredith, a young African American air force veteran, attempted to enroll in University of Mississippi. He was stopped by the governor of Mississippi, but a federal court guaranteed his right to attend. Supporting Meredith and the court order, President Kennedy sent in 400 federal marshals and 3,000 troops to control mob violence and protect Meredith's right to attend class. A similar case involving governor George Wallace of Alabama occurred at the University of Alabama, and was stopped by Kennedy as well (1963).
Birmingham Campaign (1963): This was when Martin Luther King and the Southern Christian Leadership Conference (SCLC) organized a nonviolent direct action protest. However, it was a law at this place that you can't protest, so MLK and many other African Americans were jailed. This proved to be a milestone in the civil rights movement because most Americans believed King was jailed unjustly.
"Letter From Birmingham Jail" (1963): This letter defends the strategy of nonviolent resistance to racism. In it, MLK defends nonviolent direct action. He is protesting because he collected facts to determine if injustices exist -- and they did --, he tried negotiating -- which didn't work --, he believes in self purification, which means the cleansing of anger, selfishness, and violent attitudes from the heart and soul, for their rights.
March on Washington (1963): This was a march led by Martin Luther King and A. Philip Randolph and was one of the largest and most successful demonstrations in U.S. history. About 200,000 blacks and whites took part in this peaceful protest in support of the civil rights bill. It argued for economic opportunities, such as fair housing, desegregated schools, employment rights, and voting rights.
March to Montgomery (1965): This was a voting rights march from Selma, Alabama, to the state capital of Montgomery. It was met with beatings and tear gas in what became known as "Bloody Sunday". Televised pictures of the violence proved a turning point in the civil rights movement. The national outrage moved President Johnson to send federal troops to protect King and other marchers in another attempt to petition the state government. This caused the passing of the Voting Rights Act of 1965. Nevertheless, young African Americans were losing patience with the slow progress toward equality and the continued violence against their people by white extremists.
Black Muslims: This was a movement led by Elijah Muhammad who was seeking a new cultural identity based on Africa and Islam. The movement preached black nationalism, separatism, and self-improvement, and had attracted thousands of followers. One of its most controversial leaders would become Malcolm X.
Malcolm X: This person became a convert while serving in prison and adopted this name. Leaving prison in 1952, this person acquired a reputation as the Black Muslims' most controversial voice. He criticized Martin Luther King Jr. as "an Uncle Tom" (subservient to whites) and advocated self-defense -- using black violence to counter white violence. He eventually left the Black Muslims and moved away from defending violence, but was assassinated by black opponents in 1965. *The Autobiography of (this person)* remains an engaging testimony to one man's development from a petty criminal into a major leader.
Black Panthers: This was an organization created by Huey Newton, Bobby Seale, and other militants as a revolutionary socialist movement advocating self-rule for American blacks.
Watts riot; race riots (1965-1968): These were riots due to the passage of the Voting Rights Act of 1965. It involved the arrest of a young black motorist by white police in this black neighborhood in Los Angeles and a six-day race riot that killed 34 people and destroyed over 700 buildings. These riots continued to erupt each summer in black neighborhoods of major cities with increasing casualties and destruction of property. Rioters shouted slogans such as "Burn baby, burn" and "Get whitey".
Kerner Commission (1967): This was a federal commission investigated the causes of the race riots in Watts and other cities. They concluded that racism and segregation were chiefly responsible and that the United States was becoming "two societies, one black, one white -- separate and unequal."
Martin Luther King Jr.'s (MLK's) assassination (1968): This person, while standing on a motel balcony in Memphis, Tennessee had been shot and killed by a white man. This caused massive riots in 168 cities across the country, leaving at least 46 people dead. The violence did not reflect the ideals of the murdered leader, but it did reveal the anger and frustrations among African Americans in both the North and the South. The violence also fed a growing "white backlash," especially among white blue-collar voters, to the civil rights movement, which was soon reflected in election results.
Civil Rights Act of 1968 (Fair Housing Act): This act prohibited housing discrimination on the basis of race, religion, national origin, and sex. It is loosely enforced by the Department of H.U.D.

Loving v. VA (1967): This court case legalized interracial marriage.
Mapp v. Ohio (1961): This court case ruled that illegally seized evidence cannot be used in court against the accused.
Gideon v. Wainwright (1963): This court case required that state courts provide counsel (services of an attorney) for indigent (poor) defendants.
Escobedo v. Illinois (1964): This court case required the police to inform an arrested person of his or her right to remain silent.
Miranda v. Arizona (1966): This court case extended the ruling in Escobedo v. Illinois to include the right to a lawyer being present during questioning by the police.
Baker v. Carr (1962): This court case declared state legislature that had districts that strongly favored rural areas to the disadvantage of cities unconstitutional.
"One man, one vote": This was a Supreme Court principle that meant that election districts would have to be redrawn to provide equal representation for all citizens.
Yates v. United States (1957): This court case said that the 1st Amendment protected radical and revolutionary speech, even by Communists, unless it was a "clear and present danger" to the safety of the country.
Engel v. Vitale (1962): This court case ruled that state laws requiring prayers and Bible readings in the public schools violated the 1st Amendment's provision for separation of church and state.
Griswold v. Connecticut (1965): This court case ruled that, in recognition of a citizen's right to privacy, a state could not prohibit the use of contraceptives by adults. (This privacy case provided the foundation for later cases establishing a woman's right ot an abortion.)

Students for a Democratic Society (1962): This was a newly formed radical organization that held a meeting in Port Huron, Michigan. Following the leadership of Tom Hayden, this group issued a declaration of purposes known as the Port Huron Statement, which called for university decisions to be made through participatory democracy, so that students would have a voice in decisions affecting their lives. This group was formed because various liberal groups began to identify with blacks' struggle against oppressive controls and laws.
New Left: This would become activists and intellectuals who supported the idea of participatory democracy and follow the Students for a Democratic Society.
Weathermen: This was the most radical fringe of the Students for a Democratic Society, which embraced violence and vandalism in their attacks on American institutions. In the eyes of most Americans, this group's extremist acts and language discredited the early idealism of the New Left.
Counterculture / Cultural Movement: This was the general term that was expressed by young people in rebellious styles of dress, music, drug use, and, for some, communal living. The apparent dress code of the "hippies" and "flower children" of the 1960s included long hair, beards, beads, and jeans. The folk music of Joan Baez and Bob Dylan gave voice to the younger generation's protests, which the rock music of the Beatles, the Rolling Stones, Jim Morrison, and Janis Joplin provided the beat and lyrics for this. However, as a result of experimenting with hallucinogenic drugs such as LSD or becoming addicted to various other drugs, some young people destroyed their lives. This' excesses and economic uncertainties of the times led to this' demise in the 1970s.
Woodstock (1969): This was a gathering of over 400,000 young people at this Music Festival in upper New York State reflected the zenith/pinnacle of counterculture / the cultural movement.
Alfred Kinsey: This person challenged traditional beliefs about sexual conduct in the late 1940s and 1950s. His research indicated that premarital sex, marital infidelity, and homosexuality were more common than anyone had suspected.
Sexual revolution: This was a change in Americans' attitudes toward sexual expression. Medicine (antibiotics for venereal disease) and science (the introduction of the birth control pill in 1960) contributed to changing attitudes about engaging in casual sex with a number of partners. In the 1980s many would blame this for the increase in illegitimate births, especially among teenagers, an increase in rape and sexual abuse, and the spread of a deadly new disease, AIDS (acquired immune deficiency syndrome).
*The Feminine Mystique* (1963): This book was written by Betty Friedan and gave the women's movement a new direction by encouraging middle-class women to seek fulfillment in professional careers in addition to filling the roles of wife, mother, and homemaker.
National Organization for Women (NOW) (1966): This organization, founded with help from Betty Friedan, adopted the activist tactics of other civil rights movements to secure equal treatment of women, especially for job opportunities.
Equal Pay Act (1963): This act prohibited discrimination in compensation on the basis of gender, but had been poorly enforced.
Equal Rights Amendment (ERA) (1972): This amendment was a major legislative victory for feminists and was passed by Congress and stated "Equality of rights under the law shall not be denied or abridged by the United States or by any state on account of sex." Although NOW and other groups campaigned hard for the ratification of this amendment, it just missed acceptance by the required 38 states. It was defeated in part because of a growing reaction against feminism by conservatives who feared the movement threatened the traditional roles of women.

Stonewall Riots (1969): These were riots on behalf of the LGBT community. It was caused when a gay bar sold liquor without a liquor license, and the police came in very forcefully and brutally attacked the gay patrons. Side note - the American Psychological Association said that homosexuality was a disorder at the time.
United Farm Workers (1962): This was a labor union for Mexican farm workers. They protested and marched to Sacramento, California, which drew national attention that these Mexican migrant workers were being oppressed by their employees. In 1970, employers gave new contracts and allowed collective bargaining rights for this union. It was led by Cesar Chavez, who pressured workers in the South to help Mexican farm workers with new contracts that involved higher wages.


Tonkin Gulf Resolution / Gulf of Tonkin Resolution (1964): This resolution gave the president, as commander in chief, a blank check to take "all necessary measures" to protect U.S. interests in Vietnam.
Six-Day War (1967): This was a war fought between Israel and the neighboring states of Egypt, Jordan, and Syria. It resulted with Israel winning and capturing the Sinai Peninsula, Gaza Strip, West Bank, Old City of Jerusalem, and the Golan Heights.
Credibility gap: This was created because of misinformation from military and civilian leaders combined with President Johnson's reluctance to speak frankly with the American people about the scope and the costs of the war. President Johnson always hoped that a little more military pressure would bring the North Vietnamese to the peace table, but he failed to understand both the enemy and the nature of the war.
Hawks: These were the supporters of the Vietnam War. They believed that the war was an act of Soviet-backed Communist aggression against South Vietnam and that it was part of a master plan to conquer all of Southeast Asia.
Doves: These people were against the Vietnam War. They viewed the conflict as a civil war fought by Vietnamese nationalists and some Communists who wanted to unite their country by overthrowing a corrupt Saigon (, capital of South Vietnam) government.
Operation Rolling Thunder (1965-68): This was a strategic bombing campaign by the U.S. air force that attacked industrial and military targets throughout North Vietnam. One of their main targets was the Ho Chi Minh Trail, which started in North Vietnam, goes through Laos, and then into South Vietnam, and was the Communist main supply line..
Tet Offensive (1968): This was an all-out surprise attack on almost every provincial capital and American base in South Vietnam. Although the attack took a fearful toll in the cities, the U.S. military counterattacked, inflicted much heavier losses on the Vietcong, and recovered the lost territory. Even so, in political terms, the American military victory proved irrelevant to the way this was interpreted at home. The destruction viewed by millions on the TV news appeared as a colossal setback for Johnson's Vietnam policy. Thus, for the Vietcong and North Vietnamese, this was a tremendous political victory in demoralizing the American public.


Eugene McCarthy: This person was the leader of the anti-war movement of Vietnam. He was the from Minnesota and became the first anti-war advocate to challenge Johnson for the 1968 Democratic presidential nomination
Robert F. Kennedy: This person was the attorney general under John F. Kennedy and made sure that African Americans were protected while also appealing the southern Democrats. He was a senator from New York and entered the presidential race, but was killed after his victory speech after he won in California's primary. He was shot and killed by a young Arab nationalist who opposed Kennedy's support for Israel.
Hubert Humphrey: This person was the vice president under President Johnson. He decided to run for the election of 1968 at the Chicago Convention, but was thwarted by anti-war demonstrators who started a "police riot." This left this person as the nominee of a badly divided Democratic party, and early polls showed he was a clear underdog in a nation sick of disorder and protest.
George Wallace: This person channeled growing hostility of many whites to federal desegregation, anti-war protests, and race riots. He was the first politician of late-20th-century America to marshal the general resentment against the Washington establishment ("pointy-head liberals," as he called them) and the two party system. He ran for president as the self-nominated candidate of the American Independent party, hoping to win enough electoral votes to throw the election into the House of Representatives.
Richard Nixon: This person was the Republican candidate in the election of 1968 and the 37th president. He was a "hawk" on the Vietnam War and ran on the slogans of "peace with honor" and "law and order."